# Abstract
Organizations rely heavily on the use of information technology (IT) products and services to run their day-to-day activities. Ensuring the security of these products and services is of the utmost importance for the success of the organization. This publication introduces the information security principles that organizations may leverage to understand the information security needs of their respective systems.

# 1 Introduction

## 1.1 Purpose
This publication serves as a starting point for those new to information security as well as those unfamiliar with NIST information security publications and guidelines. The intent of this special publication is to provide a high-level overview of information security principles by introducing related concepts and the security control families (as defined in NIST SP 800-53, Security and Privacy Controls for Federal Information Systems and Organizations) that organizations can leverage to effectively secure their systems and information.

To better understand the meaning and intent of the security control families described later, this publication begins by familiarizing the reader with various information security principles. After the introduction of these security principles, the publication provides detailed descriptions of multiple security control families as well as the benefits of each control family. The point is not to impose requirements on organizations, but to explore available techniques for applying a specific control family to an organization’s system and to explain the benefit(s) of employing the selected controls.

Since this publication provides an introduction to information security, detailed steps as to how security controls are implemented or how to check for security control effectiveness are not included. Rather, separate publications that may provide more detailed information about a specific topic will be noted as a reference.

## 1.2 Intended Audience
The target audience for this publication are those new to the information security principles and tenets needed to protect information and systems in a way that is commensurate with risk. This publication provides a basic foundation of concepts and ideas to any person tasked with or interested in understanding how to secure systems.

For that reason, this publication is a good resource for anyone seeking a better understanding of information security basics or a high-level view on the topic. The tips and techniques described in this publication may be applied to any type of information or system in any type of organization. While there may be differences in the way federal organizations, academia, and the private sector process, store, and disseminate information within their respective systems, the basic principles of information security are applicable to all.

## 1.3 Organization
This publication is organized as follows:# Information Security Overview

## Chapter Summaries

### Chapter 1
Describes the purpose, target audience, important terms, the legal foundation for information security, and a list of NIST publications related to information security and information risk management.

### Chapter 2
Lists eight major elements regarding information security.

### Chapter 3
Outlines several roles, supporting roles, and the respective responsibilities attributed to those roles on providing information security to the organization.

### Chapter 4
Introduces threats and vulnerabilities, distinguishes the difference between the two, and provides examples of different threat sources and events.

### Chapter 5
Discusses information security policy and the differences between Program Policy, Issue-Specific Policy, and System-Specific Policy.

### Chapter 6
Considers how to manage risk and briefly describes the six steps of the NIST Risk Management Framework (RMF).

### Chapter 7
Focuses on information assurance and what measures can be taken to protect information and systems.

### Chapter 8
Introduces system support and operations, which collectively function to run a system.

### Chapter 9
Provides a brief overview of cryptography as well as several NIST 800-series Publications that contain additional, more detailed information on specific cryptographic technologies.

### Chapter 10
Introduces the 20 information security and privacy control families.

## Appendices

### Appendix A
Provides a list of References.

### Appendix B
Provides a Glossary of terms used throughout the document.

### Appendix C
Provides a list of Acronyms and Abbreviations used throughout the document.

## Important Terminology

The term **Information System** is defined by 44 U.S.C., Sec. 3502 as “a discrete set of information resources organized for the collection, processing, maintenance, use, sharing, dissemination, or disposition of information.” For this publication, the term **system** is used in lieu of the term information system to reflect the broader applicability of information resources of any size or complexity, organized expressly for the collection, processing, use, sharing, dissemination, maintenance, or disposition of data or information.

Some other key terms to be familiar with are:

- **Information**:
1. Facts or ideas, which can be represented (encoded) as various forms of data;
2. Knowledge (e.g., data, instructions) in any medium or form that can be communicated between system entities.

- **Information Security**: The protection of information and information systems from unauthorized access, use, disclosure, disruption, modification, or destruction in order to ensure confidentiality, integrity, and availability.

- **Confidentiality**: Preserving authorized restrictions on information access and disclosure, including means for protecting personal privacy and proprietary information.

- **Integrity**: Guarding against improper information modification or destruction and ensuring information non-repudiation and authenticity.
- **Data Integrity**: The property that data has not been altered in an unauthorized manner.# Data Integrity and Security

## Key Concepts

- **Data Integrity**: Covers data in storage, during processing, and while in transit.
- **System Integrity**: The quality that a system has when it performs its intended function in an unimpaired manner, free from unauthorized manipulation of the system, whether intentional or accidental.
- **Availability**: Ensuring timely and reliable access to and use of information.
- **Security Controls**: The management, operational, and technical controls (i.e., safeguards or countermeasures) prescribed for a system to protect the confidentiality, availability, and integrity of the system and its information.

## Legal Foundation for Federal Information Security Programs

Within the Federal Government, many laws and regulations mandate that federal organizations protect their systems, the information processed, stored, or transmitted by systems, and related technology resources (e.g., telecommunications). A sampling of these laws and regulations is listed below.

### Key Legislation

- **The Computer Security Act of 1987**: Required agencies to identify sensitive systems, conduct computer security training, and develop computer security plans. This act was superseded by the Federal Information Security Management Act of 2002 (FISMA).

- **The Federal Information Resource Management Regulation (FIRMR)**: Was the primary regulation for the use, management, and acquisition of computer resources in the Federal Government. The law was abolished pursuant to the Information Technology Management Reform Act of 1996 (ITMRA), redesignated the Clinger-Cohen Act.

- **The E-Government Act of 2002**: Intended to enhance the management and promotion of electronic government services and processes by establishing a Federal Chief Information Officer (CIO) within the Office of Management and Budget (OMB), and by establishing a broad framework of measures that require the use of Internet-based information technology to enhance citizens’ access to government information and services, and to improve the way the government operates.

- **The Federal Information Security Management Act (FISMA)**: Enacted as part of the E-Government Act of 2002 to address specific information security needs, which include, but are not limited to, providing a comprehensive framework for ensuring the effectiveness of information security controls over information resources that support federal operations and assets; and the development and maintenance of minimum controls required to protect federal information and systems (as written in SEC. 301 of Public Law 107-347).

- **The Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014**: An amendment to FISMA that made several modifications to modernize federal security practices as well as promote and strengthen the use of continuous monitoring.

- **OMB Circular A-130**: Management of Federal Information Resources, requires that federal agencies establish information security and privacy programs containing specified elements.

- **OMB Memoranda**: As applicable.

This is not a comprehensive list of laws and regulations related to federal systems. There are more specific requirements imposed on federal agencies depending on the type of information and systems they manage.# Information Security and Legal Compliance

## Overview
Organizations are responsible for storing, processing, and disseminating information securely. This document outlines the legal requirements and provides guidance on developing an effective information security approach.

## Legal Requirements
Federal managers must familiarize themselves with and comply with applicable legal requirements. However, laws and regulations often do not provide detailed instructions for protecting information. Instead, they specify broad, flexible requirements, such as restricting access to personal data to authorized users.

### Examples of Relevant Laws
- **Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)**: Requires protection of the privacy and security of health information.
- **Sarbanes-Oxley (SOX) Act**: Protects the public from accounting errors and fraudulent practices in financial systems.

## Related NIST Publications
When it comes to information security and risk management, several Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS) and NIST Special Publications (SPs) are applicable:

### FIPS
- **FIPS 199**: Standards for Security Categorization of Federal Information and Information Systems. This standard provides a common framework for expressing security in a way that promotes effective management and consistent reporting.
- **FIPS 200**: Minimum Security Requirements for Federal Information and Information Systems. This specifies minimum security requirements and a risk-based process for selecting necessary security controls.

### NIST Special Publications
- **SP 800-18**: Guide for Developing Security Plans for Systems. This publication describes the procedures for developing a system security plan and outlines the security requirements and controls.
- **SP 800-30**: Guide for Conducting Risk Assessments. This provides guidance for conducting risk assessments of federal systems and organizations.
- **SP 800-34**: Contingency Planning Guide for Federal Information Systems. This assists organizations in understanding the purpose, process, and format of information system contingency plans (ISCPs).
- **SP 800-37**: Guide for Applying the Risk Management Framework to Systems: A Security Life Cycle Approach. This provides guidelines for applying the Risk Management Framework to federal systems, including security categorization, control selection, assessment, authorization, and monitoring.# Managing Information Security Risk

## SP 800-39
Managing Information Security Risk: Organization, Mission, and Information System View, provides guidelines to establish an integrated, organization-wide program for managing information security risk to organizational operations (e.g., mission, functions, image, and reputation), assets, individuals, other organizations, and the Nation resulting from the operation and use of federal systems.

## SP 800-53
Security and Privacy Controls for Systems and Organizations, provides guidelines for selecting and specifying security controls for organizations and systems supporting the executive agencies of the Federal Government to meet the requirements of FIPS Publication 200.

## SP 800-53A
Assessing Security and Privacy Controls in Systems and Organizations: Building Effective Assessment Plans, provides:
- Guidelines for building effective security assessment plans and privacy assessment plans.
- A comprehensive set of procedures for assessing the effectiveness of security controls and privacy controls employed in systems and organizations supporting the executive agencies of the Federal Government.

## SP 800-60
Guide for Mapping Types of Information and Information Systems to Security Categories, assists agencies in consistently mapping security impact levels to types of:
- Information (e.g., privacy, medical, proprietary, financial, contractor sensitive, trade secret, investigation).
- Systems (e.g., mission critical, mission support, administrative).

## SP 800-128
Guide for Security-Focused Configuration Management of Information Systems, provides guidance for organizations responsible for managing and administrating the security of federal systems and associated environments of operation.

## SP 800-137
Information Security Continuous Monitoring (ISCM) for Federal Information Systems and Organizations, assists organizations in the development of an ISCM strategy and the implementation of an ISCM program, which provide awareness of threats and vulnerabilities, visibility into organizational assets, and the effectiveness of deployed security controls.

# Elements of Information Security
This publication addresses eight major elements regarding information security to help the reader gain a better understanding of how the security requirements and controls discussed in Chapter 10 support the overall operations of the organization. These eight concepts are:

1. Information security supports the mission of the organization.
2. Information security is an integral element of sound management.
3. Information security protections are implemented so as to be commensurate with risk.
4. Information security roles and responsibilities are made explicit.
5. Information security responsibilities for system owners go beyond their own organization.
6. Information security requires a comprehensive and integrated approach.
7. Information security is assessed and monitored regularly.
8. Information security is constrained by societal and cultural factors.

## 2.1 Information Security Supports the Mission of the Organization
In Chapter 1, information security was defined as the protection of information.# Information Security Overview

## Importance of Information Security

Information security is essential to protect organizations from unauthorized access, use, disclosure, disruption, modification, or destruction. The careful implementation of information security controls is vital to safeguarding an organization’s information assets, reputation, legal position, personnel, and other tangible or intangible assets.

## Impact of Security Measures

An organization’s inability to select and implement appropriate security rules and procedures can negatively impact its mission. Conversely, well-chosen security measures that protect important assets support the overall organizational mission. In today’s environment, characterized by malicious code, system breaches, and insider threats, publicized security issues can have dire consequences, particularly for profitability and reputation. Both private and public-sector organizations can enhance profit and service to customers when appropriate security protections are in place.

## Security as a Means to an End

Information security should be viewed as a means to an end, not an end in itself. It is critical to understand the organizational mission and how each system supports that mission. Once a system's role is defined, the security requirements implicit in that role can also be articulated. Security can then be explicitly stated in terms of the organization's mission.

## Inter-Organizational Security

The roles and functions of a system may extend beyond a single organization. In an inter-organizational system, each organization benefits from securing the system. For instance, in electronic commerce, each participant requires security controls to protect their resources. Good security on the buyer's system also benefits the seller, as it reduces the likelihood of fraud and system unavailability, which could negatively affect the seller. The reverse is also true.

## Management's Role in Information Security

### Acceptable Risk

Management personnel are ultimately responsible for determining the level of acceptable risk for a specific system and the organization as a whole, considering the cost of security controls. Since information security risk cannot be completely eliminated, the objective is to find the optimal balance between protecting information or systems and utilizing available resources.

### Protecting Assets

It is vital for systems and related processes to protect information, financial assets, physical assets, and employees while also considering resource availability. When an organization's information and systems are linked with external systems, management's responsibilities extend beyond organizational boundaries. This may require management to:

1. Know the general level or type of security employed on the external system(s).
2. Seek assurance that the external system provides adequate security for the organization’s information and systems.

For example, cloud service providers (CSPs) and cloud supply chain participants may assume the management role for storing, processing, and securing data.# Transmitting Organizational Information

However, that does not leave the organization free of any security-related responsibility. It is up to the organization to ensure that the CSPs and cloud supply chain participants provide an appropriate level of security for the information being stored, processed, and transmitted.

## 2.3 Information Security Protections are Implemented Commensurate with Risk

Risk to a system can never be completely eliminated. Therefore, it is crucial to manage risk by striking a balance between usability and the implementation of security protections. The primary objective of risk management is to implement security protections that are commensurate with risk.

Applying unnecessary protections may waste resources and make systems more difficult to use and maintain. Conversely, not applying protections needed to protect the system may leave it and its information vulnerable to breaches in confidentiality, integrity, and availability, all of which could impede or even halt the mission of the organization.

Federal organizations use impact levels (high, moderate, and low) to identify and categorize the impact that a loss of confidentiality, integrity, or availability of information and/or a system may have on the organization’s operations and allow them to identify appropriate protections. The accurate categorization of information and systems is integral in determining how to protect information commensurate with risk.

Security categories convey the impact that a loss of confidentiality, integrity, or availability may have on the mission of the organization. To determine the impact level of a system, organizations may refer to the guidance in FIPS 199, NIST SP 800-30, and NIST SP 800-60.

An accurate determination of the system impact level provides the information needed to select an appropriate set of security controls from NIST SP 800-53. The selection process includes an assessment of the costs to implement and maintain the security controls and the expected security benefits (i.e., risk reduction) from applying those controls.

Security benefits have both direct and indirect costs. Direct costs include purchasing, installing, and administering security protections (e.g., access control software or fire-suppression systems). Indirect costs may affect both system and business performance, employee morale, or retraining requirements. In some cases, indirect costs may exceed the direct cost of the control.

Organizational management is responsible for weighing the cost versus benefit of the appropriate protection implementation and making risk-based decisions.

## 2.4 Information Security Roles and Responsibilities are Made Explicit

The roles and responsibilities of system owners, common control providers, authorizing officials, system security officers, users, and others are clear and documented. If the responsibilities are not made explicit, management may find it difficult to hold personnel accountable for future outcomes.

Documenting information security responsibilities is not dependent on the size of the organization.# Information Security Responsibilities and Approaches

## Organizational Policy
Even small organizations can prepare a document that states the organizational policy and identifies the information security responsibilities for a system or for the entire organization. Roles and responsibilities are discussed briefly in Chapter 3 of this publication. For more detailed information specific to key information security participants, refer to Appendix D of NIST SP 800-37.

## Information Security Responsibilities for System Owners
### Beyond Their Own Organization
Information security responsibilities for system owners go beyond their own organization. Users of a system are not always located within the boundary of the system they use or have access to. For example, when an interconnection between two or more systems is in place, information security responsibilities might be shared amongst the participating organizations.

When such is the case, the system owners are responsible for sharing the security measures used by the organization to provide confidence to the user that the system is adequately secure and capable of meeting security requirements. In addition to sharing security-related information, the incident response team has a duty to respond to security incidents in a timely fashion in order to prevent damage to the organization, personnel, and other organizations.

## Comprehensive and Integrated Approach
### Importance of a Comprehensive Approach
Providing effective information security requires a comprehensive approach that considers a variety of areas both within and outside of the information security field. This approach applies throughout the entire system life cycle.

For example, defense-in-depth is a security principle used to protect organizational information and systems from threats by implementing multi-layered security countermeasures. Defense-in-depth utilizes administrative defenses (e.g., policies, procedures) and security technologies (e.g., intrusion detection systems, firewalls, configuration settings, and antivirus software) in tandem with physical security defenses (e.g., gates, guards) to minimize the probability of a successful attack on the system.

These measures not only help reduce the likelihood that a security breach will compromise access to system assets or have detrimental effects on confidentiality, integrity, or availability, but also give the organization near-real time notification once an attack has been initiated.

### Interdependencies of Security Controls
#### Synergistic Effects
Security controls are seldom put in place as stand-alone solutions to a problem. They are typically more effective when paired with another control or set of controls. Security controls, when selected properly, can have a synergistic effect on the overall security of a system. Each security control in NIST SP 800-53 has a related controls section listing security control(s) that complement that specific control. If users do not understand these interdependencies, the results can be detrimental to the system.

### Other Interdependencies
Interdependencies between and amongst security controls are not the only factor to consider in the overall security strategy.# Information Security Considerations

## Influence of Various Factors on Security Controls

Several factors can influence the effectiveness of security controls, including:

- System management
- Legal constraints
- Quality assurance
- Privacy concerns
- Internal and management controls

System managers must recognize how information security relates to other security disciplines, such as physical and environmental security. Understanding these relationships is beneficial for implementing a holistic security strategy.

### Relevant Standards

NIST SP 800-160, *Systems Security Engineering: Considerations for a Multidisciplinary Approach in the Engineering of Trustworthy Secure Systems*, provides detailed information on considerations for engineering a trustworthy system.

## Importance of Understanding Security Control Relationships

Understanding the relationships between security controls is crucial, especially when systems are interconnected or part of a globally distributed supply chain ecosystem. Supply chains consist of both public and private sector entities and utilize geographically diverse routes to deliver refined, cost-effective, reusable information and communications technology (ICT) solutions.

For more information on supply chain risk management, refer to NIST SP 800-161, *Supply Chain Risk Management Practices for Federal Information Systems and Organizations*.

## Continuous Monitoring of Information Security

### Regular Assessment and Monitoring

Information security is not static; it requires continuous monitoring and management to protect the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of information. Organizations must quickly identify and respond to new vulnerabilities and evolving threats, especially in a constantly changing workforce and technological environment.

### Information Security Continuous Monitoring (ISCM)

ISCM is defined in NIST SP 800-137 as the maintenance of ongoing awareness of information security, vulnerabilities, and threats to support organizational risk management decisions. ISCM helps organizations understand their risk tolerance, set priorities, and manage risk consistently.

ISCM ensures that selected security controls remain effective and maintains awareness of threats and vulnerabilities. For more detailed information on continuous monitoring fundamentals and processes, refer to NIST SP 800-137. Additionally, NIST SP 800-53A can provide insights on assessment procedures.

## Societal and Cultural Constraints on Information Security

Societal factors influence how individuals understand and use systems, which impacts the information security of both the system and the organization. Individuals perceive, reason, and make risk-based decisions differently. To address these variations, organizations should make information security functions transparent, easy to use, and understandable.# Information Security and Organizational Culture

## Introduction
Providing regularly scheduled security awareness training mitigates individual differences of risk perception. As with societal factors, how an organization conducts business can serve as a cultural factor worth considering when dealing with information security. An organization’s own culture can impact its response to information security.

## Importance of Transparency
Careful explanation of the risks associated with business practices can help in the transparency and acceptance of the recommended information security practices.

## Balancing Security and Usability
It is incumbent on organizations to find a balance between information security requirements and usability. Organizations can leverage a variety of tools that meet the security requirements of their systems without unduly burdening the user.

### Example Scenario
For example, consider a system that requires a user to input their username and password multiple times to access different applications during a single session. In that scenario, organizations can choose which types of applications, if any, will permit password and password hash storage based on a consideration of the risks versus the convenience of the users.

## The Relationship Between Privacy and Information Security
Privacy was once considered to be unrelated to information security—the two functions were discussed as if they could not co-exist in a system. Today, a symbiotic relationship between privacy and information security is essential.

### Fundamental Responsibilities
Organizations cannot protect the privacy of individuals without a basic foundation of information security. However, privacy is more than security as it also relates to problems that individuals may experience as a result of the authorized processing of their information throughout the data life cycle. Protecting the privacy of individuals is a fundamental responsibility of organizations that collect, use, maintain, share, and dispose of personally identifiable information (PII).

### Further Reading
For more detailed privacy information, see:
- NISTIR 8062, *An Introduction to Privacy Engineering and Risk Management in Federal Systems*
- NIST SP 800-122, *Guide to Protecting the Confidentiality of Personally Identifiable Information (PII)*

## Societal Norms and Information Security
Overall, the relationship between security and societal norms need not necessarily be antagonistic. Societal norms can have both a positive and negative impact on information security.

### Negative and Positive Impacts
- **Negative Impact**: A user writing down passwords and keeping them near their computer.
- **Positive Impact**: A broader implementation of multi-factor authentication—where in order for a user to reset a password, more than one form of authentication is required (e.g., text message to user, physical token).

## Conclusion
Security can enhance the access and flow of data and information by providing more accurate and reliable information as well as greater availability of systems. Security mechanisms can also enhance individuals’ privacy (e.g., encryption).# Security Solutions and Organizational Roles

## Introduction
May present new vulnerabilities (e.g., single sign-on). Thus, it is important to consider how to implement security solutions in ways that optimize broader societal goals. Societal norms change and so too must the information security protections placed on systems. Security controls that are presently sufficient may not keep pace with the constantly changing computing environment. The culture and security environment of the organization also plays an important role in the employees’ perception of risk. Insufficient or non-existent security standards may lead to the degradation of the organization’s security posture. Providing updated and recurring training on what is and what is not an acceptable use of organizational systems helps safeguard the overall security of the system.

## 3 Roles and Responsibilities
The following chapter outlines specific organizational roles and their respective responsibilities. Clearly defined roles and responsibilities help the organization and its employees work in a more efficient manner by designating who is responsible for performing certain tasks. In a large organization, this will help by ensuring that no task is overlooked. In a small, less structured organization, the workload can be more evenly distributed as an employee may be required to take on more than one task.

The list provided below is not intended to be a comprehensive list of all the possible roles within an organization. Each organization may define their own specific roles or have a different naming convention based on their mission or organizational structure. However, the basic functions remain the same. For a more detailed description of the responsibilities assigned to each role, see Appendix D in NIST SP 800-37.

### 3.1 Risk Executive Function (Senior Management)
The Risk Executive Function is an individual or group (e.g., board members, CEO, CIO) within an organization responsible for ensuring that:
1. Risk-related considerations for individual systems are viewed from an organization-wide perspective, taking into consideration the overall strategic goals of the organization in carrying out its core missions and business functions.
2. The management of system-related security risks is consistent across the organization, reflects organizational risk tolerance, and is considered along with other types of risks in order to ensure mission/business success.

**Responsibilities include, but are not limited to:**
- Defining a holistic approach to addressing risk across the entire organization.
- Developing an organizational risk management strategy.
- Supporting information-sharing amongst authorizing officials and other senior leaders within the organization.
- Overseeing risk management related activities across the organization.

### 3.2 Chief Executive Officer (CEO)
The Chief Executive Officer is the highest-level senior official or executive in an organization with the overall responsibility to provide information security protections commensurate with the...# Risk and Magnitude of Harm

The risk and magnitude of harm (i.e., impact) to organizational operations, assets, individuals, other organizations, and the Nation may result from unauthorized access, use, disclosure, disruption, modification, or destruction of:

1. Information collected or maintained by or on behalf of the organization.
2. Systems used or operated by an agency, or by a contractor of an agency, or another organization on behalf of an agency.

## Responsibilities

Responsibilities include, but are not limited to:

- Ensuring the integration of information security management processes with strategic and operational planning processes.
- Making sure that the information and systems used to support organizational operations have proper information security safeguards.
- Confirming that trained personnel are complying with related information security legislation, policies, directives, instructions, standards, and guidelines.

## 3.3 Chief Information Officer (CIO)

The Chief Information Officer is an organizational official responsible for:

1. Designating a senior agency information security officer.
2. Developing and maintaining security policies, procedures, and control techniques to address all applicable requirements.
3. Overseeing personnel with significant responsibilities for information security and ensuring that personnel are adequately trained.
4. Assisting senior organizational officials with their security responsibilities.
5. In coordination with other senior officials, reporting annually on the overall effectiveness of the organization’s information security program, including progress of remedial actions.

### Responsibilities

Responsibilities include, but are not limited to:

- Allocating resources dedicated to the protection of the systems supporting the organization’s mission and business functions.
- Ensuring that systems are protected by approved security plans and are authorized to operate.
- Making sure that there is an organization-wide information security program that is being effectively implemented.

## 3.4 Information Owner/Steward

The Information Owner/Steward is an organizational official with statutory, management, or operational authority for specified information who is responsible for establishing the policies and procedures governing its generation, collection, processing, dissemination, and disposal.

### Responsibilities

Responsibilities include, but are not limited to:

- Establishing the rules for the appropriate use and protection of the subject information.
- Providing input to system owners regarding the security requirements and security controls needed to adequately protect the subject information.

## 3.5 Senior Agency Information Security Officer (SAISO)

The Senior Agency Information Security Officer is an organizational official responsible for:

1. Carrying out the Chief Information Officer security responsibilities under FISMA.
2. Serving as the primary liaison between the Chief Information Officer and the organization.# Information Security Roles and Responsibilities

## 3.6 Authorizing Official (AO)

The Authorizing Official is a senior official or executive with the authority to formally assume responsibility for operating a system at an acceptable level of risk to organizational operations and assets, individuals, and other organizations.

### Responsibilities include, but are not limited to:
- Approving security plans, memorandums of agreement or understanding, plans of action and milestones, as well as determining whether significant changes in the system or environments of operation require reauthorization.
- Ensuring that authorizing official designated representatives carry out all activities and functions associated with security authorization.

## 3.7 Authorizing Official Designated Representative

The Authorizing Official Designated Representative is an organizational official who acts on behalf of an authorizing official to coordinate and conduct the required day-to-day activities associated with the security authorization process. The designated representative carries out the functions of the AO but cannot accept risk for the system.

### Responsibilities include, but are not limited to:
- Carrying out the duties of the Authorizing Official as assigned.
- Making decisions with regard to planning and resourcing of the security authorization process, approval of the security plan, approving and monitoring the implementation of plans of action and milestones, and the assessment and/or determination of risk.
- Preparing the final authorization package, obtaining the authorizing official’s signature on the authorization decision document, and transmitting the authorization package to appropriate organizational officials.

## 3.8 Senior Agency Official for Privacy (SAOP)

The Senior Agency Official for Privacy is a senior organizational official who has the overall responsibility and accountability for ensuring the agency’s implementation of information privacy protections, including the agency’s full compliance with federal laws, regulations, and policies relating to information privacy, such as the Privacy Act.

### Responsibilities include, but are not limited to:
- Overseeing, coordinating, and facilitating the agency’s privacy compliance efforts.
- Reviewing the agency’s information privacy procedures to ensure that they are comprehensive and up-to-date.
- Ensuring the agency’s employees and contractors receive appropriate training and education programs regarding the information privacy laws, regulations, policies, and procedures governing the agency’s handling of personal information.# 3.9 Common Control Provider

The Common Control Provider is an individual, group, or organization responsible for the development, implementation, assessment, and monitoring of common controls (i.e. security controls inherited by systems).

## Responsibilities include, but are not limited to:
- Documenting the organization-identified common controls in a security plan (or equivalent document prescribed by the organization).
- Ensuring that required assessments of common controls are carried out by qualified assessors with an appropriate level of independence defined by the organization.

# 3.10 System Owner

The System Owner is an organizational official responsible for the procurement, development, integration, modification, operation, maintenance, and disposal of a system.

## Responsibilities include, but are not limited to:
- Addressing the operational interests of the user community (i.e., users who require access to the system to satisfy mission, business, or operational requirements).
- Ensuring compliance with information security requirements.
- Developing and maintaining the system security plan and ensuring that the system is deployed and operated in accordance with the agreed-upon security controls.

# 3.11 System Security Officer (SSO)

The System Security Officer is responsible for ensuring that an appropriate operational security posture is maintained for a system and as such, works in close collaboration with the system owner.

## Responsibilities include, but are not limited to:
- Overseeing the day-to-day security operations of a system.
- Assisting in the development of the security policies and procedures and ensuring compliance with those policies and procedures.

# 3.12 Information Security Architect

The Information Security Architect is an individual, group, or organization responsible for ensuring that the information security requirements necessary to protect the organization’s core missions and business processes are adequately addressed in all aspects of enterprise architecture, including reference models, segment and solution models, and the resulting systems supporting those missions and business processes.

## Responsibilities include, but are not limited to:
- Serving as the liaison between the enterprise architect and the information security engineer.
- Coordinating with system owners, common control providers, and system security officers on the allocation of security controls as system-specific, hybrid, or common controls.

# 3.13 System Security Engineer (SSE)

The System Security Engineer is an individual, group, or organization responsible for conducting system security engineering activities.

## Responsibilities include, but are not limited to:
- Designing and developing organizational systems or upgrading legacy systems.
- Coordinating security-related activities with information security architects, senior agency information security officers, system owners, common control providers, and others.# System Security Roles and Responsibilities

## 3.14 Security Control Assessor
The Security Control Assessor is an individual, group, or organization responsible for conducting a comprehensive assessment of the managerial, operational, and technical security controls and control enhancements employed within or inherited by a system to determine the overall effectiveness of the controls (i.e., the extent to which the controls are implemented correctly, operating as intended, and producing the desired outcome with respect to meeting the security requirements for the system).

### Responsibilities include, but are not limited to:
- Providing an assessment to identify weaknesses or deficiencies in the system and its environment of operation;
- Recommending corrective actions to address identified vulnerabilities; and
- Preparing a security assessment report containing the results and findings from the assessment.

## 3.15 System Administrator
The System Administrator is an individual, group, or organization responsible for setting up and maintaining a system or specific components of a system.

### Responsibilities include, but are not limited to:
- Installing, configuring, and updating hardware and software;
- Establishing and managing user accounts;
- Overseeing backup and recovery tasks; and
- Implementing technical security controls.

## 3.16 User
The User is an individual, group, or organization granted access to organizational information in order to perform assigned duties.

### Responsibilities include, but are not limited to:
- Adhering to policies that govern acceptable use of organizational systems;
- Using the organization-provided IT resources for defined purposes only; and
- Reporting anomalies or suspicious system behavior.

## 3.17 Supporting Roles

### Auditor
Auditors are responsible for examining systems to determine:
1. Whether the system is meeting stated security requirements and organization policies; and
2. Whether security controls are appropriate. Informal audits can be performed by those operating the system under review or by impartial third-party auditors.

### Physical Security Staff
The physical security office is responsible for developing and enforcing appropriate physical security controls, often in consultation with information security management, program and functional managers, and others. Physical security addresses central system installations, backup facilities, and office environments. In the government, this office is often responsible for processing personnel background checks and security clearances.

### Disaster Recovery/Contingency Planning Staff
Some organizations have a separate disaster recovery/contingency planning staff. In such cases, the staff is typically responsible for contingency planning for the entire organization and works with program and functional managers/application owners, the information security staff, and others.# Contingency Planning Support

## Quality Assurance Staff
Many organizations have established a quality assurance program to improve the products and services they provide to their customers. The quality assurance staff should have a working knowledge of information security and how it can be used to enhance the quality of the program (e.g., ensuring the integrity of computer-based information, the availability of services, and the confidentiality of customer information).

## Procurement Office Staff
The procurement (or acquisitions) office is responsible for ensuring that organizational procurements have been reviewed by appropriate officials. While the procurement office staff lacks the technical expertise to guarantee that goods and services meet information security expectations, it should nevertheless be knowledgeable of information security standards and should bring potential information security issues to the attention of those requesting such technology.

## Training Office Staff
The organization determines whether the primary responsibility for training users, operators, and managers in information security rests with the training office or the information security program office. In either case, the two organizations should work together to develop an effective training program.

## Human Resources
The Human Resource office is often the first point-of-contact for managers who require assistance in determining whether or not a security background investigation is necessary for a particular position. The human resources and security offices generally work closely on issues involving background investigations. The human resources office may also be responsible for security-related exit procedures when employees leave an organization.

## Risk Management/Planning Staff
Some organizations employ a full-time staff devoted to analyzing all manner of risks to which the organization may be exposed. Although this office normally focuses on organizational risk issues, it should also consider information security-related risks. Risk analyses for specific systems are not typically performed by this office.

## Physical Plant Staff
This office is responsible for ensuring the provision of the services necessary for the safe and secure operation of an organization's systems (e.g., electrical power and environmental controls). The office is often augmented by separate medical, fire, hazardous waste, or life safety personnel.

## Privacy Office Staff
This office is responsible for maintaining a comprehensive privacy program that ensures compliance with applicable privacy requirements, develops and evaluates privacy policy, and manages privacy risks. This office includes a Senior Authorizing Official for Privacy, privacy compliance, and risk assessment.# Privacy Risk Management

## Overview
This publication focuses on managing privacy risks, particularly those arising from information security measures. It is relevant for specialists, legal professionals, and other experts in the field.

## Threats and Vulnerabilities: A Brief Overview

### Definition of Vulnerability
A vulnerability is defined as a weakness in a system, security procedure, internal controls, or implementation that can be exploited by a threat source. Vulnerabilities can leave systems susceptible to various activities that may result in significant and sometimes irreversible losses to individuals, groups, or organizations. These losses can range from a single damaged file on a laptop or mobile device to entire databases at an operations center being compromised.

### Exploitation of Vulnerabilities
With the right tools and knowledge, an adversary can exploit system vulnerabilities to gain access to the information stored within them. The damage inflicted on compromised systems can vary depending on the threat source.

### Threat Sources
Threat sources can be categorized as:
- **Adversarial Threat Sources**: Individuals, groups, organizations, or entities that seek to exploit an organization’s dependence on cyber resources. This includes employees, privileged users, and trusted users who may defraud organizational systems.
- **Non-Adversarial Threat Sources**: Natural disasters or erroneous actions taken by individuals during their everyday responsibilities.

### Threat Events
If a system is vulnerable, threat sources can lead to threat events, which are incidents or situations that could potentially cause undesirable consequences or impacts. For example, a hacker installing a keystroke monitor on an organizational system represents a threat source leading to a threat event. The damage caused by threat events can vary significantly, affecting the confidentiality, integrity, or availability of the information stored in a system.

### Importance of Understanding Threats
This chapter provides a broad overview of the current environment in which systems operate, which may be valuable for organizations seeking a better understanding of specific threat environments. The information provided is not exhaustive, and threats against specific systems may differ from those discussed.

### Protecting Systems from Risk
To protect a system from risk and implement cost-effective security measures, system owners, managers, and users must understand the vulnerabilities of the system, as well as the threat sources and events that may exploit these vulnerabilities. When determining the appropriate response to a discovered vulnerability, it is essential to minimize resource expenditure on vulnerabilities where little or no threat is present.

For more detailed information, refer to Chapter 6, **Information Security Risk Management**.# Threats, Vulnerabilities, Safeguard Selection, and Risk Response

## 4.1 Examples of Adversarial Threat Sources and Events

The previous section defined threat sources and threat events. This section provides several examples of each followed by a description.

### 4.1.1 Fraud and Theft

Systems can be exploited for fraud and theft by “automating” traditional methods of fraud or by utilizing new methods. System fraud and theft can be committed by insiders (i.e., authorized users) and outsiders. Authorized system administrators and users with access to and familiarity with the system (e.g., resources it controls, flaws) are often responsible for fraud. An organization’s former employees also pose a threat given their knowledge of the organization’s operations, particularly if access is not terminated promptly.

Financial gain is one of the chief motivators behind fraud and theft, but financial systems are not the only systems at risk. There are several techniques that an individual can use to gather information they would otherwise not have had access to. Some of these techniques include:

- **Social Media**: The ubiquity of social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn) has allowed cyber criminals to exploit the platform to conduct targeted attacks. Using easily-made, fake, and unverified social media accounts, cyber criminals can impersonate coworkers, customer service representatives, or other trusted individuals in order to send links to malicious code that steal personal or sensitive organizational information. Social media exacerbates the ongoing issue of fraud, and organizations should see it as a serious concern when implementing systems. Social media accounts provide a means of gathering contact information, interests, and personal connections of a targeted individual, which in turn can be used to conduct a social engineering attack.

- **Social Engineering**: Social engineering, in the context of information security, is a technique that relies heavily on human interaction to influence an individual to violate security protocol and encourages the individual to divulge confidential information. These types of attacks are commonly committed via phone or online. Attacks perpetrated over the phone are the most basic social engineering attacks being committed. For example, an attacker may mislead a company into believing the attacker is an existing customer and have that company divulge information about that customer. Online, this technique is called phishing—an email-based attack intended to trick individuals into performing an action beneficial to the attacker (e.g., clicking a link or divulging personal information). Social engineering online attacks can also be accomplished by using attachments that contain malicious code, which target an individual’s address book. The information obtained allows the attacker to send malicious code to all the contacts in the victim’s address book, propagating the damage of the initial attack.

- **Advanced Persistent Threat (APT)**: An advanced persistent threat is a long-term...# Intrusion

Intrusion attempts to gain access to specific data and information. Instead of trying to cause damage, APT (Advanced Persistent Threat) attacks are designed to harvest information from the network or target. Some APT attacks can be so complicated that to remain undetected by intrusion detection systems (IDSs) in the network, they require around-the-clock rewriting of the code by an administrator. Once enough information about the network has been gathered, the attacker can create a backdoor, which is a way of bypassing security mechanisms in systems, and gain undetected access to the network. An external command and control system is then used by the attacker to continuously monitor the system to extract information.

## 4.1.2 Insider Threat

Employees can represent an insider threat to an organization given their familiarity with the employer’s systems and applications as well as what actions may cause the most damage, mischief, or disorder. Employee sabotage—often instigated by knowledge or threat of termination—is a critical issue for organizations and their systems. In an effort to mitigate the potential damage caused by employee sabotage, the terminated employee’s access to IT infrastructure should be immediately disabled, and the individual should be escorted off company premises.

### Examples of system-related employee sabotage include, but are not limited to:
- Destroying hardware or facilities
- Planting malicious code that destroys programs or data
- Entering data incorrectly, holding data, or deleting data
- Crashing systems
- Changing administrative passwords to prevent system access

## 4.1.3 Malicious Hacker

Malicious hacker is a term used to describe an individual or group who use an understanding of systems, networking, and programming to illegally access systems, cause damage, or steal information. Understanding the motivation that drives a malicious hacker can help an organization implement the proper security controls to prevent the likelihood of a system breach.

Malicious hacker is a broad category of adversarial threats that can be broken out into smaller categories depending on the specific actions or intent of the malicious hacker. Some of the sub-categories adapted from NIST SP 800-82, Guide to Industrial Control Systems (ICS) Security, include:

### Attackers
Attackers break into networks for the thrill and challenge or for bragging rights in the attacker community. While remote hacking once required considerable skills or computer knowledge, attackers can now download attack scripts and protocols from the Internet and launch them against victim sites. These attack tools have become both more sophisticated and easier to use. In some cases, attackers do not have the requisite expertise to threaten difficult targets such as critical government networks. Nevertheless,# Threats Posed by Cyber Attackers

The worldwide population of attackers poses a relatively high threat of isolated or brief disruptions that could cause serious damage to business or infrastructure.

## Types of Attackers

### Bot-Network Operators
Bot-network operators assume control of multiple systems to coordinate attacks and distribute phishing schemes, spam, and malicious code. The services of compromised systems and networks can be found in underground markets online (e.g., purchasing a denial of service attack, using servers to relay spam or phishing attacks).

### Criminal Groups
Criminal groups seek to attack systems for monetary gain. Specifically, organized crime groups use spam, phishing, and spyware/malicious code to commit identity theft and online fraud. International corporate spies and organized crime organizations also pose threats to the Nation based on their ability to conduct industrial espionage, large-scale monetary theft, and the recruitment of new attackers. Some criminal groups may try to extort money from an organization by threatening a cyber-attack or by encrypting and disrupting its systems for ransom. Extortion or ransom attacks have disrupted numerous businesses and cost significant resources and planning to mitigate. Without effective backup plans and restoration procedures, many businesses have resorted to paying costly ransoms to restore their encrypted systems.

### Foreign Intelligence Services
Foreign intelligence services use cyber tools as part of their information gathering and espionage activities. In addition, several nations are aggressively working to develop information warfare doctrines, programs, and capabilities. Such capabilities enable a single entity to have a significant and serious impact by disrupting the supply, communications, and economic infrastructures that support military power – impacts that could affect the daily lives of U.S. citizens. In some instances, threats posed by foreign government intelligence services may be present. In addition to possible economic espionage, foreign intelligence services may target unclassified systems to further their intelligence missions. Some unclassified information that may be of interest includes travel plans of senior officials, civil defense and emergency preparedness, manufacturing technologies, satellite data, personnel and payroll data, and law enforcement, investigative, and security files.

### Phishers
Phishers are individuals or small groups that execute phishing schemes to steal identities or information for monetary gain. Phishers may also use spam and spyware/malicious code to accomplish their objectives.

### Spammers
Spammers are individuals or organizations that distribute unsolicited e-mail with hidden or false information to sell products, conduct phishing schemes, distribute spyware/malicious code, or attack organizations (e.g., DoS).

### Spyware/Malicious Code Authors
Individuals or organizations who maliciously carry out attacks against users by producing and distributing spyware and malicious code. Destructive computer viruses and worms have harmed files and hard drives.# Threats to Information Security

## 1. Types of Threat Actors

### 1.1 Terrorists
Terrorists seek to destroy, incapacitate, or exploit critical infrastructures to threaten national security, cause mass casualties, weaken the U.S. economy, and damage public morale and confidence. They may use phishing schemes or spyware/malicious code to generate funds or gather sensitive information. Additionally, they may attack one target to divert attention or resources from other targets.

### 1.2 Industrial Spies
Industrial espionage seeks to acquire intellectual property and know-how using clandestine methods.

## 2. Malicious Code

Malicious code refers to viruses, Trojan horses, worms, logic bombs, and any other software created for the purpose of attacking a platform.

### 2.1 Virus
A code segment that replicates by attaching copies of itself to existing executables. The new copy of the virus is executed when a user executes the new host program. The virus may include an additional "payload" that triggers when specific conditions are met.

### 2.2 Trojan Horse
A program that performs a desired task but also includes unexpected and undesirable functions. For example, an editing program for a multiuser system could be modified to randomly and unexpectedly delete a user’s files each time they perform a useful function (e.g., editing).

### 2.3 Worm
A self-replicating program that is self-contained and does not require a host program or user intervention. Worms commonly use network services to propagate to other host systems.

### 2.4 Logic Bomb
This type of malicious code is a set of instructions secretly and intentionally inserted into a program or software system to carry out a malicious function at a predisposed time and date or when a specific condition is met.

### 2.5 Ransomware
Ransomware is a type of malicious code that blocks or limits access to a system by locking the entire screen or by locking down or encrypting specific files until a ransom is paid. There are two different types of ransomware attacks—encryptors and lockers:
- **Encryptors** block (encrypt) system files and demand a payment to unblock (or decrypt) those files. Encryptors, or crypto-ransomware, are the most common and most worrisome (e.g., WannaCry).
- **Lockers** are designed to lock users out of operating systems. The user still has access to the device and other files, but in order to unlock the infected computer, the user is asked to pay a ransom. To make matters worse, even if the user pays the ransom, there is no guarantee that the attacker will actually provide the decryption key or unlock the infected system.

## 3. Examples of Non-Adversarial Threat Sources and Events

### 3.1 Errors and Omissions
Errors and omissions can be inadvertently caused by system operators who process hundreds of tasks.# Information Security Policy

## 4.2.1 Errors and Omissions in Data Entry

Transactions daily or by users who create and edit data on organizational systems can lead to errors and omissions that degrade data and system integrity. Software applications, regardless of their sophistication, are not capable of detecting all types of input errors and omissions. Therefore, it is the responsibility of the organization to establish a sound awareness and training program to reduce the number and severity of these errors.

Errors by users, system operators, or programmers may occur throughout the life cycle of a system and may directly or indirectly contribute to security problems. In some cases, the error is a threat, such as a data entry error or a programming error that crashes a system. In other cases, the errors cause vulnerabilities. Programming and development errors, often referred to as “bugs,” can range from benign to catastrophic.

## 4.2.2 Loss of Physical and Infrastructure Support

The loss of supporting infrastructure includes power failures (e.g., outages, spikes, brownouts), loss of communications, water outages and leaks, sewer malfunctions, disruption of transportation services, fire, flood, civil unrest, and strikes. A loss of supporting infrastructure often results in system downtime in unexpected ways. For example, employees may not be able to get to work during a winter storm, although the systems at the work site may be functioning as normal. Additional information can be found in section 10.11, Physical and Environmental Protection.

## 4.2.3 Impacts to Personal Privacy of Information Sharing

The accumulation of vast amounts of personally identifiable information (PII) by government and private organizations has created numerous opportunities for individuals to experience privacy problems as a byproduct or unintended consequence of a breach in security. For example, migrating information to a cloud service provider has become a viable option that many individuals and organizations utilize. The ease of accessing data from the cloud has made it a more attractive solution for long-term storage. Everything that is written, uploaded, or posted is stored in a cloud system that individuals do not control. However, unbeknownst to the cloud service user, personal information can be accessed by a stranger with the right tools and technical skill sets.

Individuals voluntarily sharing PII through social media has also contributed to new threats that allow malicious hackers to use that information for social engineering or to bypass common authentication measures. Linking all this information and technology together, malicious hackers have the ability to create accounts using someone else’s information or gain access to networks. Organizations may share information about cyber threats that includes PII. These disclosures could lead to unanticipated uses of such information, including surveillance or other law enforcement actions.# Information Security Policy

The term **policy** has more than one definition when discussing information security. NIST SP 800-95, *Guide to Secure Web Services*, defines policy as “statements, rules or assertions that specify the correct or expected behavior of an entity.” For example, an authorization policy might specify the correct access control rules for a software component. The term policy can also refer to specific security rules for a system or even the specific managerial decisions that dictate an organization’s email privacy policy or remote access security policy.

## Definition of Information Security Policy

Information security policy is defined as an aggregate of directives, regulations, rules, and practices that prescribes how an organization manages, protects, and distributes information. In making these decisions, managers face difficult decisions with regard to resource allocation, competing objectives, and organizational strategy, all of which relate to protecting technical and information resources as well as guiding employee behavior. Managers at all levels make choices that can affect policy, with the scope of the policy’s applicability varying according to the scope of the manager’s authority.

## Types of Policies

Managerial decisions on information security issues vary greatly. To differentiate various kinds of policy, this chapter categorizes them into three basic types:

1. **Program Policy**
2. **Issue-specific Policy**
3. **System-specific Policy**

Policy controls are addressed by the “-1” controls for every security control family found in NIST SP 800-53. The “-1” controls establish policy and procedures for the effective implementation of the selected security control and control enhancement.

## 5.1 Standards, Guidelines, and Procedures

Because policy is written at a broad level, organizations also develop standards, guidelines, and procedures that offer users, managers, system administrators, and others a clearer approach to implementing policy and meeting organizational goals. Standards and guidelines specify technologies and methodologies to be used to secure systems. Procedures are yet more detailed steps to be followed to accomplish security-related tasks. Standards, guidelines, and procedures may be promulgated throughout an organization via handbooks, regulations, or manuals.

### Organizational Standards

- Organizational standards (not to be confused with American National Standards, FIPS, Federal Standards, or other national or international standards) specify uniform use of specific technologies, parameters, or procedures when such uniform use will benefit an organization. Standardization of organization-wide identification badges is a typical example, providing ease of employee mobility and automation of entry/exit systems. Standards are normally compulsory within an organization.

### Guidelines

- Guidelines assist users, systems personnel, and others in effectively securing their systems. The nature of guidelines, however, immediately recognizes that systems vary considerably, and imposition of standards is not always achievable, appropriate, or cost-effective. For example, an organizational guideline may be used to help...# System-Specific Standard Procedures

Developing system-specific standard procedures is essential for ensuring that specific security measures are not overlooked. Guidelines are often used to help in this regard, although they can be implemented correctly in more than one way.

## Procedures

Procedures describe how to implement applicable security policies, standards, and guidelines. They consist of detailed steps to be followed by users, system operations personnel, or others to accomplish a particular task (e.g., preparing new user accounts and assigning the appropriate privileges).

Some organizations issue overall information security manuals, regulations, handbooks, or similar documents. These may mix policy, guidelines, standards, and procedures since they are closely linked. While manuals and regulations can serve as important tools, it is often useful if they clearly distinguish between policy and its implementation. This can help in promoting flexibility and cost-effectiveness by offering alternative implementation approaches to achieving policy goals.

## 5.2 Program Policy

Program policy is used to create an organization’s information security program. Program policies set the strategic direction for security and assign resources for its implementation within the organization. A management official—typically the SISO—issues program policy to establish or restructure the organization’s information security program. This high-level policy defines the purpose of the program and its scope within the organization, addresses compliance issues, and assigns responsibility to the information security organization for direct program implementation as well as other related responsibilities.

### 5.2.1 Basic Components of Program Policy

Program policy addresses the following:

- **Purpose**: Program policy often includes a statement describing the purpose and goals of the program. Security-related needs such as integrity, availability, and confidentiality can form the basis of organizational goals established in the policy. For instance, in an organization responsible for maintaining large mission-critical databases, a reduction in errors, data loss, data corruption, and recovery might be specifically stressed. However, in an organization responsible for maintaining confidential personal data, goals might emphasize stronger protection against unauthorized disclosure.

- **Scope**: Program policies are clear as to which resources (e.g., facilities, hardware and software, information, and personnel) the information security program protects. In many cases, the program will encompass all systems and organizational personnel, while in others, it might be appropriate for an organization’s information security program to be more limited in scope. For example, a policy intended to protect information stored on a classified or high-impact system will be much more stringent than that of a policy.# Information Security Program Policy

## Responsibilities
Once the information security program is established, its management is normally assigned to either a newly created or existing office. The responsibilities of officials and offices throughout the organization also need to be addressed. This section of the policy statement, for example, would distinguish between the responsibilities of information service providers and the managers of applications using the provided services. The policy would also establish operational security offices for major systems, particularly those at high risk or that are most critical to organizational operations. It can also serve as the basis for establishing employee accountability. Roles and responsibilities were addressed in Chapter 3 of this publication.

## Compliance
Program policy typically addresses two compliance issues:

1. **General Compliance**: This ensures meeting the requirements to establish a program and the responsibilities assigned therein to various organizational components. Often an oversight entity (e.g., the Inspector General) is assigned responsibility for monitoring compliance, including how well the organization is implementing management’s priorities for the program.

2. **Penalties and Disciplinary Actions**: The use of specified penalties and disciplinary actions is addressed. Since the security policy is a high-level document, specific penalties for various infractions are not normally detailed here. Instead, the policy may authorize the creation of compliance structures that include violations and specific disciplinary actions.

An important aspect of developing compliance policy is to remember that an employee’s violation of policy may be unintentional. For example, nonconformance can often be the result of a lack of knowledge or training. The need to obtain guidance from appropriate legal counsel is critical when addressing issues involving penalties and disciplinary action for individuals. The policy does not need to restate penalties already addressed by law, although they can be listed if the policy will also be used as an awareness or training document.

## Issue-Specific Policy
Based on the guidance from the information security policy, issue-specific policies are developed to address areas of current relevance and concern to an organization. The intent is to provide specific guidance and instructions on proper usage of systems to employees within the organization. An issue-specific policy is meant for every technology the organization uses and is written in such a way that it will be clear to users. Unlike program policies, issue-specific policies must be reviewed on a regular basis due to frequent technological changes in an organization.

### Example Topics for Issue-Specific Policy
There are many areas for which issue-specific policy may be appropriate. New technologies and the discovery of new threats often require the creation of an issue-specific policy. Examples of issue-specific policy include:

- **Internet Access**: Connecting to the Internet yields many benefits as well as...# Internet Access Policy

## Overview
An Internet access policy may address several issues, including:

- **Access Identification**: Who will have access to the network.
- **System Connections**: What types of systems may be connected to the network.
- **Information Transmission**: What types of information may be transmitted via the network.
- **User Authentication**: Requirements for user authentication for Internet-connected systems.
- **Firewall Usage**: The use of firewalls.

## Email Privacy
This policy clarifies:

- **Information Collection**: What information is collected and stored.
- **Usage of Information**: How the information is being used.
- **Monitoring**: Management may monitor employees to ensure they are using organizational systems for business purposes, and to check for issues like virus distribution, sending offensive content, or disclosing private business information.
- **Privacy Levels**: Users may be accorded a certain level of privacy regarding email, and this policy addresses what level of privacy to expect and the circumstances under which email may be read.

## Bring Your Own Device (BYOD)
The BYOD policy allows individuals to use personal devices in the workplace. Key points include:

- **Productivity and Cost**: BYOD can increase productivity and decrease costs to the organization.
- **Security Challenges**: Introducing different operating systems and user configurations can challenge the security of the organization's information and the privacy of the employee.
- **Policy Components**: A comprehensive BYOD policy includes specific considerations for the device and the user, as well as rules of behavior that must be adhered to in order to access organizational resources using personal devices.

## Social Media
Even if the organization does not have a social media presence, it is important to have a social media policy to protect the organization and its employees. This policy provides:

- **Guidelines for Users**: Expected behavior when using different social media platforms.
- **Policy Strictness**: Depending on the organization, the policy can be strict (not allowing the use of social media on organization-provided resources) or lenient (allowing social media access within specified limitations).

## Other Topics for Issue-Specific Policy
Other candidates for issue-specific policy include, but are not limited to:

- Approach to risk management and contingency planning.
- Protection of confidential/proprietary information.
- Unauthorized software.
- Unauthorized use of equipment.
- Violations of policy.
- Use of external storage.
- Rights of privacy.
- Physical emergencies.

# Basic Components of Issue-Specific Policy

An issue-specific policy can be broken down into the following components:

## Issue Statement
To formulate a policy on an issue, the information owner/steward must first define the issue, including any relevant terms, distinctions, and conditions. It is often useful to specify the goal or justification for the policy to facilitate compliance.

For example, an organization might want to develop an issue-specific policy on the use of "unofficial software," defined as any software not approved, purchased, screened, managed, or owned by the organization. Additionally, applicable distinctions and conditions might need to be included for some software.# Software Use Policy Guidelines

## Introduction
This document outlines the key components of an issue-specific policy regarding the use of software within an organization.

## Statements of the Organization’s Position
Once the issue is stated and related terms and conditions are detailed, this section is used to clearly state the organization's position (i.e., management's decision) on the issue. For example, this would mean stating whether the use of unofficial software, as defined, is prohibited in all or some cases, whether there are further guidelines for approval and use, or whether case-by-case exceptions may be granted, by whom, and on what basis.

## Applicability
Issue-specific policies also need to include statements of applicability. This means clarifying where, how, when, to whom, and to what a policy applies. For example, it could be that the hypothetical policy on unofficial software is intended to apply only to the organization's own on-site resources and employees and not to contractors with offices at other locations. Additionally, the policy's applicability might need to be clarified as it pertains to employees traveling among different sites, working from home, or who need to transport and use disks at multiple sites.

## Roles and Responsibilities
The assignment of roles and responsibilities is also usually included in issue-specific policies. For example, if the policy permits employees to use privately owned, unofficial software at work with the appropriate approvals, then the approval authority granting such permission would need to be stated. The policy would stipulate who, by position, has such authority. Likewise, it would need to be clarified who would be responsible for ensuring that only approved software is used on organizational system resources and, possibly, for monitoring users regarding unofficial software.

## Compliance
For some types of policy, it may be appropriate to describe unacceptable infractions and the consequences of such behavior in greater detail. Penalties may be explicitly stated and consistent with organizational personnel policies and practices. When used, they can be coordinated with appropriate officials, offices, and even employee bargaining units. It may also be desirable to task a specific office in the organization with monitoring compliance.

## Points of Contact and Supplementary Information
For any issue-specific policy, indicate the appropriate individuals to contact in the organization for further information, guidance, and compliance. Since positions tend to change less often than the individuals occupying them, specific positions may be preferable as the point of contact. For example, for some issues, the point of contact might be a line manager; for other issues, it might be a facility manager, technical support person, system administrator, or security personnel.# System-Specific Policy

## Overview
Program and issue-specific policies are broad, high-level policies written to encompass the entire organization, while system-specific policies provide information and direction on what actions are permitted on a particular system. These policies are similar to issue-specific policies in that they relate to specific technologies throughout the organization. However, system-specific policies dictate the appropriate security configurations to the personnel responsible for implementing the required security controls in order to meet the organization’s information security needs.

To develop a cohesive and comprehensive set of security policies, officials may use a management process that derives security rules from security goals. It is helpful to consider a two-level model for system security policy: security objectives and operational security rules. Closely linked and often difficult to distinguish, however, is the implementation of the policy in technology. Similar to issue-specific policies, it is recommended that system-specific policies be reviewed as required by organization-defined time periods to ensure conformance to the most current security procedures.

## 5.4.1 Security Objectives
The first step in the management process is to define security objectives commensurate with risk for the specific system. Although this process may begin with an analysis of the need for integrity, confidentiality, and availability, it may not stop there. A security objective needs to be specific, concrete, well-defined, and stated in such a way that it is a clearly achievable objective. Stakeholders play an important role in developing comprehensive, yet practical, policy. Therefore, it is imperative to remember that policy is not created by management personnel only.

## 5.4.2 Operational Security Rules
After management determines the security objectives, rules for managing and operating a system can be identified and documented. For example, the rules may define authorized modifications—specifying individuals allowed to take certain actions under particular conditions with regard to specific classes and records of information. The degree of specificity needed for operational security varies from system to system. The more detailed the rules are, the easier it is for administrators to determine when a violation has occurred. A detailed description can also streamline automating policy enforcement.

In addition to deciding the level of detail, management determines the degree of formality in documenting the system-specific policy. Once again, the more formal the documentation, the...# Access Control Policy Documentation

## Importance of Documentation
Documenting access control policy can make it substantially easier to follow and enforce. A helpful practice would be to draft a statement of the access privileges for a system as well as the assignment of security responsibilities. The rules for system usage and the consequences of noncompliance should also be addressed.

## Policy Decisions in Information Security
Policy decisions in other areas of information security, such as those described in this publication, are often documented in the risk analysis, accreditation statements, or procedural manuals. However, any controversial, atypical, or uncommon policies will also need formal statements. Atypical policies may include areas in which the system policy varies from organizational policy or from normal practice within the organization. The documentation for a typical policy contains a statement explaining the reason for deviation from the organization's standard policy.

### System-Specific Policy Implementation
Technology plays an important role in enforcing system-specific policies, but it is not solely responsible for meeting an organization’s security needs. When technology is used to enforce policy, it is important to consider manual methods. For example, technical system-based controls could be used to limit the printing of confidential reports to a specific printer. However, corresponding physical security measures would also have to be in place to limit access to the printer output, or the desired security objective would not be achieved.

#### Technological Methods for Policy Implementation
Technological methods frequently used to implement system-security policy are likely to include the use of logical access controls. Some examples of access controls would be:
- **Separation of Duties**: A control designed to address the potential for abuse of authorized privileges and helps reduce the risk of malevolent activity without collusion.
- **Least Privilege**: Allows only authorized access for users or processes acting on behalf of users that is necessary to accomplish assigned tasks in accordance with organizational missions and business functions.

However, there are other automated means of enforcing or supporting security policy that typically supplement logical access controls. For example, intrusion detection software can alert system administrators to suspicious activity or even take action to stop such activity.

### Advantages and Disadvantages of Technology-Based Enforcement
Technology-based enforcement of system-security policy has both advantages and disadvantages. A system, properly designed, programmed, installed, configured, and maintained, consistently enforces policy within the system, although no system can force users to follow all procedures. Management controls also play an important role in policy enforcement, so neglecting them would be detrimental to the organization.

In addition, deviations from the policy may sometimes be necessary and appropriate; such deviations may be difficult to implement easily with some technical controls. This situation occurs frequently if...# Implementation of Security Policy

The implementation of the security policy is too rigid, which can occur when the system analysts fail to anticipate contingencies and prepare for them.

## 5.5 Interdependencies

Policy is related to many of the topics covered in this publication:

- **Program Management**: Policy is used to establish an organization's information security program and is therefore closely tied to program management and administration. Both program and system-specific policy may be established in any of the areas covered in this publication. For example, an organization may wish to have a consistent approach to contingency planning for all its systems and would issue appropriate program policy to do so. On the other hand, it may decide that its systems are sufficiently independent of each other that system owners can deal with incidents on an individual basis.

- **Access Controls**: System-specific policy is often implemented using access controls. For example, it may be a policy decision that only two individuals in an organization are authorized to run a check-printing program. Access controls are used by the system to implement or enforce this policy.

- **Links to Broader Organizational Policies**: It is important to understand that information security policies are often extensions of other organizational policies. Support and coordination should be reciprocal between information security and other organizational policies to minimize confusion. For example, an organization's email policy would likely be relevant to its broader policy on privacy.

## 5.6 Cost Considerations

A number of potential costs are associated with developing and implementing information security policies. The most significant costs are implementing the policy and addressing its subsequent impacts on the organization, its resources, and personnel. The establishment of an information security program, accomplished through policy, likely does not come at a negligible cost.

Other costs may be those incurred through the policy development process. Numerous administrative and management activities may be required for drafting, reviewing, coordinating, clearing, disseminating, and publicizing policies. In many organizations, successful policy implementation may require additional staffing and training.

In general, the costs to an organization for information security policy development and implementation will be dependent upon how extensive the change must be in order for management to decide that an acceptable level of risk has been reached.

The cost of securing information and systems is unavoidable. The objective is to ensure that security protections are commensurate with risk by striking a balance between the protections required to meet the security objectives of the organization and the cost of such protections.# Information Security Risk Management

Risk is a measure of the extent an entity is threatened by a potential circumstance or event, and typically a function of:

1. The adverse impacts that would arise if the circumstance or event occurs.
2. The likelihood of occurrence.

Individuals manage risks every day, though they may not be aware of it. Actions as routine as buckling a car safety belt, carrying an umbrella when rain is forecasted, or writing down a list of things to do rather than trusting to memory all fall under the purview of risk management. Individuals recognize various threats to their best interests and take precautions to guard against them or to minimize their effects.

Both government and industry routinely manage a myriad of risks. For example, to maximize their return on investments, businesses must often choose between growth investment plans that are aggressive and high-risk or slow and secure. These decisions require analysis of risk relative to potential benefits, consideration of alternatives, and, finally, the implementation of what management determines to be the best course of action.

## Risk Management in Information Security

With respect to information security, risk management is the process of minimizing risks to organizational operations (e.g., mission, functions, image, and reputation), organizational assets, individuals, other organizations, and the Nation resulting from the operation of a system. NIST SP 800-39 identifies four distinct steps for risk management:

### 1. Framing Risk

Framing risk describes how organizations establish a risk context for the environment in which risk-based decisions are made. The purpose of the risk framing component is to produce a risk management strategy that addresses how organizations intend to assess, respond to, and monitor risk—while making explicit and transparent the risk perceptions that organizations routinely use in making both investment and operational decisions.

### 2. Assessing Risk

Assessing risk describes how organizations analyze risk within the context of the organizational risk frame. The purpose of the risk assessment component is to identify:

- Threats to organizations' operations and assets, individuals, other organizations, and the Nation.
- Internal and external vulnerabilities of organizations.
- The harm (i.e., consequences/impact) to organizations that may occur given the potential for threats exploiting vulnerabilities.
- The likelihood that harm will occur.

### 3. Responding to Risk

Responding to risk addresses how organizations respond to risk once that risk is determined based on the results of risk assessments. The purpose of the risk response component is to provide a consistent, organization-wide response to risk in accordance with the organizational risk frame by:

- Developing alternative courses of action for responding to risk.
- Evaluating the alternative courses of action.
- Determining appropriate courses of action consistent with organizational risk tolerance.
- Implementing risk responses based on selected courses of action.

### 4. Monitoring Risk

Monitoring risk addresses how organizations monitor risk over time. The purpose of the risk monitoring component is to verify that planned risk responses are effective and to ensure that the risk management strategy remains relevant and effective in the face of changing circumstances.# Information Security Risk Management Framework (RMF)

## Overview
Response measures are implemented to ensure that information security requirements derived from or traceable to organizational missions, business functions, federal legislation, directives, regulations, policies, standards, and guidelines are satisfied. The framework aims to:

1. Determine the ongoing effectiveness of risk response measures following implementation.
2. Identify risk-impacting changes to organizational systems and the environments in which the systems operate.

To assist organizations in managing information security risk at the system level, NIST developed the Risk Management Framework (RMF). The RMF promotes the concepts of near real-time risk management and ongoing system authorization through the implementation of robust continuous monitoring processes. It provides senior leaders with the necessary information to make cost-effective, risk-based decisions regarding the organizational systems supporting their core missions and business functions, integrating information security into the enterprise architecture and system development life cycle (SDLC). For more details, refer to NIST SP 800-160.

## Steps of the RMF
The RMF comprises six steps:

1. **System Categorization**
2. **Security Control Selection**
3. **Security Control Implementation**
4. **Security Control Assessment**
5. **System Authorization**
6. **Security Control Monitoring**

### 1. System Categorization
The first step of the RMF focuses on the categorization of the system. Organizations categorize the system and the information processed, stored, and transmitted by that system based on an impact analysis. Security categorization guidance for non-national security systems can be found in FIPS 199 and NIST SP 800-60.

### 2. Security Control Selection
The second step involves selecting an initial set of baseline security controls for the system based on the security categorization. This includes tailoring and supplementing the security control baseline as needed based on an organizational assessment of risk and local conditions. Security control selection guidance is provided in NIST SP 800-53 and FIPS 200.

### 3. Security Control Implementation
In the third step, the organization is responsible for implementing security controls and describing how the controls are employed within the system and its environment of operation. Many NIST publications provide information on security control implementations and are available for reference on the Computer Security Resource Center website.

### 4. Security Control Assessment
The fourth step ensures that the organization assesses the security controls using appropriate assessment procedures to determine the extent to which the controls are implemented correctly, operate as intended, and produce the desired outcome with respect to meeting the security requirements for the system. NIST SP 800-53A provides guidelines for the development of assessment methods and procedures to determine security control effectiveness in federal systems and for reporting assessment findings in the security assessment report.

### 5. System Authorization
The fifth step involves the authorization of the system, ensuring that it meets the necessary security requirements before it is put into operation.

### 6. Security Control Monitoring
The final step focuses on the continuous monitoring of security controls to ensure ongoing effectiveness and compliance with security requirements.

For further details on each step, refer to the respective NIST publications.# Risk Management Framework (RMF)

## 6.5 Authorization
In the fifth step, a senior manager officially authorizes a system to operate or continue to operate based on the results of a complete and thorough security control assessment. This decision is based on a determination of the risk to organizational operations and assets, individuals, other organizations, and the Nation resulting from the operation of the system and the decision that this risk is acceptable.

## 6.6 Monitor
The sixth step of the RMF is to continuously monitor the security controls in the system to ensure that they are effective over time as changes occur in the system and the environment in which the system operates. Organizations monitor the security controls in the system on an ongoing basis, including assessing control effectiveness, documenting changes to the system or its environment of operation, conducting security impact analyses of the associated changes, and reporting the security state of the system to designated organizational officials. Specific guidance on continuous monitoring can be found in NIST SP 800-137.

# 7 Assurance
Information assurance is the degree of confidence one has that security measures protect and defend information and systems by ensuring their availability, integrity, authentication, confidentiality, and non-repudiation. These measures include providing for restoration of systems by incorporating protection, detection, and reaction capabilities. Assurance is not, however, an absolute guarantee that the measures will work as intended. Understanding this distinction is crucial as quantifying the security of a system can be daunting. Nevertheless, it is something individuals expect and obtain, often without realizing it. For example, an individual may routinely receive product recommendations from colleagues but may not consider such recommendations as providing assurance.

This chapter discusses planning for assurance and presents two categories of assurance methods and tools: the design and subsequent implementation of assurance and operational assurance (further categorized into audits and monitoring). The division between the two categories can be ambiguous at times as there is significant overlap. While such issues as configuration management or audits are discussed under operational assurance, they may also be vital during a system’s development. The discussion tends to focus more on technical issues during design and implementation assurance and is a mixture of management, operational, and technical issues under operational assurance.

## 7.1 Authorization
Authorization is the official management decision to authorize the operation of a system. The authorizing official (a senior organizational executive) explicitly accepts the risk of operating the system to organizational operations (e.g., mission, functions, image, reputation), organizational assets, individuals, other organizations, and the Nation based on the implementation of an...# Security and Privacy Controls

There is a need for a collaborative relationship between the authorizing official and the Senior Agency Official for Privacy (SAOP). OMB A-130 gives SAOPs the responsibility for the review and approval of privacy plans prior to authorization, as well as the review of authorization packages for systems with Personally Identifiable Information (PII). Therefore, before making risk determination and acceptance decisions, the authorizing official communicates with the SAOP to address any privacy-related concerns before the final authorization decision is made.

The authorization process requires managers and technical staff to work together to find practical, cost-effective solutions given security needs, technical and operational constraints, requirements of other system quality attributes such as privacy, and mission or business requirements.

## Risk-Based Decision Making

To facilitate sound risk-based decision making, decisions are based on reliable and current information about the implementation and effectiveness of both technical and non-technical safeguards. These include:

- **Technical features**: Do they operate as intended?
- **Operational policies and practices**: Is the system operated according to stated policies and practices?
- **Overall security**: Are there threats that the safeguards do not address?
- **Remaining risk**: Is residual risk at an acceptable level?

The Authorizing Official is responsible for authorizing the system before it is allowed to operate and must have a plan in place for how that system will be continuously monitored.

### 7.1 Authorization and Assurance

Assurance is an integral element in making the decision to authorize a system to operate. Assurance addresses whether the technical measures and procedures are operating according to a set of security requirements and specifications, as well as general quality principles.

The authorizing official makes the final decision on how much and what types of assurance are needed for a system. In order to make a sound decision, the authorizing official considers the system categorization/impact level and reviews the results of risk assessments. The authorizing official analyzes the benefits and disadvantages of the cost of assurance, cost of controls, and risks to the organization. When the authorization process is complete, it is the responsibility of the authorizing official to accept the residual risk in the system.

### 7.2 Authorization of Products to Operate in a Similar Situation

The authorization of another product or system to operate in a similar situation can be used to provide some assurance (e.g., reciprocity). However, it is important to realize that an authorization is specific to the environment and the system. Since authorization balances risks and advantages, the same product may be appropriately authorized for one environment but not for another, even by the same authorizing official. For instance, an authorizing official might approve the use of cloud storage for research data but not for human resource data under the purview of the same system.

## 7.3 Security Engineering

(Additional content on Security Engineering would follow here.)# Building Trustworthy Systems

The size and complexity of today’s systems make building a trustworthy system a priority. Systems security engineering provides an elementary approach for building dependable systems in today’s complex computing environment. For more information on security engineering, refer to NIST SP 800-160.

## 7.2.1 Planning and Assurance

For new systems or for system upgrades, assurance requirements begin during the planning phase of the system life cycle. Planning for assurance as part of system requirements is practical and helps authorizing officials make cost-effective decisions when building a system or when purchasing the components/equipment required to provide assurance for an older system.

## 7.2.2 Design and Implementation Assurance

Design and implementation assurance addresses a system’s design as well as whether the features of a system, application, or component meet security requirements and specifications. Design and implementation assurance examines system design, development, and installation and is usually associated with the development/acquisition and implementation phase of the system life cycle. However, it may also be considered throughout the life cycle as the system is modified.

### 7.2.2.1 Use of Advanced or Trusted Development

In the development of both commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) products and customized systems, the use of advanced or trusted system architectures, development methodologies, or software engineering techniques can provide assurance. Examples include security design and development reviews, formal modeling, mathematical proofs, ISO 9000 quality techniques, ISO 15288 (a systems security engineering standard), or the use of security architecture concepts, such as a trusted computing base (TCB).

Since assurance in information technology products cannot be fully guaranteed, there are recognized evaluation processes available to establish a level of confidence that the security functionality of these IT products and the assurance measures applied to these IT products meet certain requirements. The Common Criteria (CC) allows for the comparability of results between independent evaluations. The CC is useful as a guide for the development, evaluation, and procurement of IT products with security functionality. For more information about the CC, see Common Criteria Portal or Build Security In.

### 7.2.2.2 Use of Reliable Architecture

Some system architectures are intrinsically more reliable, such as systems that use fault-tolerance, redundancy, shadowing, or redundant array of independent disks (RAID) features. These examples are primarily associated with system availability.

### 7.2.2.3 Use of Reliable Security

One factor in reliable security is the concept of ease of safe use, which postulates that a system that is easier to secure is more likely to actually be secure. Security features...# Security Evaluation and Assurance

## 7.2.2.4 Evaluations
A product evaluation normally includes testing. Evaluations can be performed by many types of organizations, including:

- Domestic and foreign government agencies
- Independent organizations such as trade and professional organizations
- Other vendors or commercial groups
- Individual users or user consortia

Product reviews in trade literature are a form of evaluation, as are more formal reviews made against specific criteria. Important factors to consider when using evaluations are:

- The degree of independence of the evaluating group
- Whether the evaluation criteria reflect needed security features
- The rigor of the testing
- The testing environment
- The age of the evaluation
- The competence of the evaluating organization
- The limitations placed on the evaluations by the evaluating group (e.g., assumptions about the threat or operating environment)

## 7.2.2.5 Assurance Documentation
The ability to describe security requirements and how they were met can reflect the degree to which a system or product designer understands applicable security issues. Without a comprehensive understanding of the requirements, it is unlikely that the designer will be able to meet them.

Assurance documentation can address the security for a system or for specific components. System-level documentation describes the system's security requirements and how they have been implemented, including interrelationships among applications, the operating system, or networks. System-level documentation addresses more than just the operating system, the security system, and applications; it describes the system as integrated and implemented in a particular environment. Component documentation will generally be an off-the-shelf product, whereas the system designer or implementer will typically develop system documentation.

## 7.2.2.6 Warranties, Integrity Statements, and Liabilities
Warranties are an additional source of assurance. A manufacturer, producer, system developer, or integrator that is willing to correct errors within certain time frames or by the next release gives the system manager a sense of commitment to the product and also speaks to the product’s quality.

An integrity statement is a formal declaration or certification of the product. It can be augmented by a promise to:

- Fix the item (i.e., warranty)
- Pay for losses (i.e., liability) if the product does not conform to the integrity statement

## 7.2.2.7 Manufacturer’s Published Assertions
The published assertion or formal declarations of a manufacturer or developer...# Assurance in Software Distribution and Operations

## 7.2.2.8 Distribution Assurance
It is often important to know that software has arrived unmodified, especially if it is distributed electronically. In such cases, check bits or digital signatures can provide high assurance that code has not been modified. Anti-virus software can be used to check software that comes from sources with unknown reliability (e.g., internet forum).

## 7.3 Operational Assurance
Design and implementation assurance addresses the quality of security features built into systems. Operational assurance addresses whether the system's technical features are being bypassed or have vulnerabilities and whether required procedures are being followed. It does not address changes in the system's security requirements, which could be caused by changes to the system and its operating or threat environment. (These changes are addressed in section 10.15).

Security tends to degrade during the operational phase of the system life cycle. System users and operators discover new ways to intentionally or unintentionally bypass or subvert security, especially if there is a perception that bypassing security improves functionality or that there will be no repercussions to them or their systems. Strict adherence to procedures is rare. Policy becomes outdated, and errors in the system's administration commonly occur.

Organizations use three basic methods to maintain operational assurance:

- **System assessment**: An event or a continuous process to evaluate security. An assessment can vary widely in scope: it may examine an entire system for the purpose of authorization or it may investigate a single anomalous event.

- **System audit**: An independent review and examination of records and activities to assess the adequacy of system controls and to ensure compliance with established policies and operational procedures.

- **System monitoring**: A process for maintaining ongoing awareness of information security, vulnerabilities, and threats to support organizational risk management decisions.

In general, the more "real-time" an activity is, the more it falls into the category of monitoring. This distinction can create some unnecessary linguistic hairsplitting, especially concerning system-generated audit trails. Daily or weekly reviewing of the audit trail for unauthorized access attempts is generally considered to be monitoring, while a historical review of several months' worth of the trail (e.g., tracing the actions of a specific user) is generally considered an audit. Overall, though, the specific terms applied to assurance-related activities are much less important than the real work of actually maintaining operational assurance.

### 7.3.1 Security and Privacy Control Assessments
Assessments can address the quality of the system as built, implemented, or operated. Assessments can be performed throughout the development cycle, after system installation, and...# Operational Assurance Assessment Methods

Throughout its operational phase, assessment methods include interviews, examinations, and testing. Some common testing techniques feature:

- **Functional Testing**: To see if a given function works according to its requirements.
- **Penetration Testing**: To see if security can be bypassed.

These techniques can range from trying several test cases to in-depth studies using metrics, automated tools, or multiple detailed test cases. See NIST SP 800-53A for assessment guidance.

## 7.3.2 Audit Methods and Tools

An audit conducted to support operational assurance examines whether the system is meeting stated or implied security requirements as well as system and organization policies. Some audits also examine whether security requirements are appropriate, though this is outside of the scope of operational assurance (See section 10.15). Less formal audits are often called security reviews.

Audits can be self-administered or independent—meaning they can be administered internally or externally. Both types can provide excellent information about technical, procedural, managerial, or other aspects of security.

### Self-Audits vs. Independent Audits

The essential difference between a self-audit and an independent audit is objectivity. Reviews conducted by system management staff—often called self-audits/assessments—present an inherent conflict of interest. The system management staff may have little incentive to report that the system was poorly designed or is carelessly operated. On the other hand, they may be motivated by a strong desire to improve the security of their system.

Independent auditors, by contrast, have no professional stake in the system. A person who performs an independent audit is organizationally independent and free from personal or external constraints that may impair their independence. An independent audit may be performed by a professional audit staff in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards.

There are numerous methods and tools that can be used to audit, some of which are described here.

#### 7.3.2.1 Automated Tools

Even for small multiuser systems, manually reviewing security features may require significant resources. Automated tools make it feasible to review even large systems for a variety of security flaws.

There are two types of automated tools:

1. **Active Tools**: These find vulnerabilities by trying to exploit them.
2. **Passive Tests**: These only examine the system and infer the existence of problems from the state of the system.

Automated tools can be used to help uncover a variety of threats and vulnerabilities, such as:

- Improper access controls or access control configurations
- Weak passwords
- Lack of system software integrity
- Not applying all relevant software updates and patches

These tools are often very successful at finding vulnerabilities and are sometimes used by...# Security Audits and Controls

## 7.3.2.2 Internal Controls Audit
An auditor can review controls in place and determine whether they are effective. The auditor will often analyze both system and non-system based controls. Techniques used include inquiry, observation, and testing of both the data and the controls themselves. The audit can also detect illegal acts, errors, irregularities, or a lack of compliance with laws and regulations. System Security Plans and penetration testing, discussed below, may be used.

## 7.3.2.3 Using the System Security Plan (SSP)
The system security plan provides implementation details against which the system can be audited. This plan, discussed in section 10.12, outlines the major security considerations for a system, including management, operational, and technical issues.

One advantage of using a system security plan is that it reflects the unique security environment of the system, rather than a generic list of controls. Security control sets can be developed, including national or organizational security policies and practices (often referred to as baselines). The SSP is also used for historical purposes and, in such instances where a system interconnection exists, may need to be shared with other organizations.

Baselines are the starting point of the security control selection process for systems. Three security control baselines have been identified corresponding to the low-impact, moderate-impact, and high-impact systems using the high-water mark defined in FIPS 200 to provide an initial set of security controls for each impact level.

Once a security control baseline is selected, organizations use the tailoring guidance in NIST SP 800-53 to remove controls from the baseline (with a justification based on risk) or to add compensating or supplemental controls to strengthen the security posture of a specific system. Care needs to be taken to ensure that deviations from the baseline are based on an assessment of the associated risk as the changes may be appropriate for the system's particular environment or technical constraints.

## 7.3.2.4 Penetration Testing
Penetration testing can use many methods to attempt a system break-in. In addition to using active automated tools as described above, penetration testing can be done "manually." The most useful type of penetration testing involves the use of methods that might be used against the system.

For hosts on the Internet, this would certainly include automated tools. For many systems, lax procedures or a lack of internal controls on applications are common vulnerabilities that penetration testing can target. Another method is social engineering, which involves deceiving users or administrators into divulging information about systems, including their configurations.# Passwords

## 7.3.3 Monitoring Methods and Tools

Security monitoring is an ongoing activity that seeks out vulnerabilities and security problems. Many of the methods are similar to those used for audits but are done more regularly or, for some automated tools, in real time.

### 7.3.3.1 Review of System Logs

A periodic review or use of automated tools to analyze system-generated logs can detect security problems, including attempts to exceed access authority or gain system access during unusual hours (see section 10.15).

### 7.3.3.2 Automated Tools

Several types of automated tools monitor a system for security problems. Some examples follow:

- **Malicious Code Scanners**: These are a popular means of checking for malicious code infections. These programs test for the presence of malicious code in executable program files.

- **Checksum Functions**: These generate a mathematical value used to detect changes in the data based on the contents of a file. When the integrity of the file is being verified, the checksum is generated on the current file and compared with the previously generated value. If the two values are equal, the integrity of the file is verified. Running a checksum on programs can detect malicious code, accidental changes to files, and other changes to files. However, they may be subject to covert replacement by a system intruder. A digital signature, which guards against more than just accidental changes to files and is vastly superior to a checksum, can also be used to verify the integrity of a file.

- **Password Strength Checkers**: These test passwords against a dictionary (either a "regular" dictionary or a specialized one with easy-to-guess passwords, or both) and also check if passwords are common permutations of the user ID. Examples of special dictionary entries could be the names of regional sports teams and stars. Common permutations could be the user ID spelled backwards or the addition of numbers or special characters after common passwords.

- **Integrity Verification Programs**: These can be used by applications to look for evidence of data tampering, errors, and omissions. Techniques include consistency and reasonableness checks and validation during data entry and processing. These techniques can check data elements—as input or as processed—against expected values or ranges of values; analyze transactions for proper flow, sequencing, and authorization; or examine data elements for expected relationships. Integrity verification programs comprise a crucial set of processes meant to assure individuals that inappropriate actions, whether accidental or intentional, will be caught. Many integrity verification programs rely on logging individual user activities.

- **Host-Based Intrusion Detection Systems**: These analyze the system audit trail for activity that...# Security Monitoring and Configuration Management

## 7.3.3.3 Configuration Management

Configuration management provides assurance that the system in operation has been configured to organizational needs and standards. It ensures that any changes to be made are reviewed for security implications and that such changes have been approved by management prior to implementation.

Configuration management can help ensure that changes take place in an identifiable and controlled environment and that they do not unintentionally harm any of the system's properties, including its security. Some organizations, particularly those with very large systems (e.g., the Federal Government), use a configuration control board for configuration management. When such a board exists, it is crucial for an information security expert to participate.

Changes to the system can have security implications. Such changes may introduce or mitigate vulnerabilities and may require updating the contingency plan, risk analysis, or authorization. For more details on configuration management, see section 10.5.

## 7.3.3.4 Trade Literature/Publications/Electronic News

In addition to monitoring the system, it is useful to monitor external sources for information. Sources such as trade literature, both printed and electronic, provide information about security vulnerabilities, patches, and other areas that impact security.

The Forum of Incident Response Teams (FIRST) has an electronic mailing list that receives information on threats, vulnerabilities, and patches. The National Vulnerability Database (NVD) is a repository of standards-based vulnerability management data represented using the Security Content Automation Protocol (SCAP). This data enables automation of vulnerability management, security measurement, and compliance.

NVD includes databases of security checklists, security-related software flaws, misconfigurations, product names, and impact metrics. The United States Computer Emergency Readiness Team (US-CERT), a DHS component, responds to major incidents, analyzes threats, and exchanges critical cybersecurity information with trusted partners around the world.

Additionally, Information Sharing and Analysis Centers (ISACs) communicate critical sector-specific information about physical and cyber threats, as well as mitigation strategies, in order to maintain sector-wide situational awareness.

## 7.4 Interdependencies

Assurance is an issue for every control and safeguard discussed in this publication. It is important to reemphasize that assurance is not only for technical controls but also for operational controls. Although this chapter focused on systems...# Assurance in Security Management

## Importance of Assurance
Assurance is crucial in ensuring that management controls are functioning properly. Key questions to consider include:
- Are user IDs and access privileges kept up to date?
- Has the contingency plan been tested?
- Can the audit trail be tampered with?
- Is the security program effective?
- Are policies understood and followed?

As noted in the introduction to this chapter, the need for assurance is more widespread than individuals often realize.

## Assurance and System Life Cycle
Assurance is closely linked to planning for security in the system life cycle. Systems can be designed to facilitate various kinds of testing against specified security requirements. By planning for such testing early in the process, costs can be reduced. Some kinds of assurance cannot be obtained without proper planning.

## Cost Considerations
There are many methods of obtaining assurance that security features work as anticipated. Since assurance methods tend to be qualitative rather than quantitative, they will need to be evaluated. Assurance can also be quite expensive, especially if extensive testing is done. It is useful to evaluate the amount of assurance received for the cost to make a best-value decision. In general, personnel costs drive up the cost of assurance. Automated tools are generally limited to addressing specific problems, but they tend to be less expensive.

# Security Considerations in System Support and Operations

## Overview
System support and operations refer to all aspects involved in running a system. This includes both system administration and tasks external to the system that support its operation (e.g., maintaining documentation). It does not include system planning or design. The support and operation of any system—from a three-person local area network to a worldwide application serving thousands of users—is critical to maintaining the security of a system. Support and operations are routine activities that enable systems to function correctly. These include:
- Fixing software or hardware problems
- Installing and maintaining software
- Helping users resolve problems

## Risks of Neglecting Security
The failure to consider security as part of the support and operations of systems can be detrimental to the organization. Information security system literature includes examples of how organizations undermined their often-expensive security measures with:
- Poor documentation
- Old user accounts
- Conflicting software
- Poor control of maintenance accounts

An organization’s policies and procedures often fail to address many of these important issues.

## Major Categories of System Support and Operations
Some major categories include:
- User support
- Software support
- Configuration management
- Backups
- Media controls
- Documentation
- Maintenance

Even though the goals of system support and operation and information security are intertwined, they must be managed effectively to ensure overall security.# System Support and Operations

## Introduction
While system support and operations are closely related, there is a distinction between the two. The primary goal of system support and operations is the continued and correct operation of the system, whereas the information security goals of a system include confidentiality, availability, and integrity. This chapter addresses the support and operations activities directly related to security. Every control discussed in this publication relies, in one way or another, on system support and operations. However, this chapter focuses on areas not covered in other chapters.

For example, operations personnel normally create user accounts on the system. This topic is covered in section 10.7. Similarly, the input from support and operations staff to the security awareness and training program is covered in section 10.2.

## 8.1 User Support
In many organizations, user support takes place through a service desk. Service desks can support an entire organization, a subunit, a specific system, or a combination of these. For smaller systems, the system administrator typically provides direct user support. Experienced users provide informal user support on most systems. It is not unusual for user support to be closely linked to the organization’s ability to handle incident response.

An important security consideration for user support personnel is being able to recognize which problems (brought to their attention by users) are security-related. For example, users’ inability to log on to a system may result from the disabling of their accounts due to too many failed access attempts. This could indicate the presence of malicious users trying to guess a user’s password.

In general, system support and operations staff need to be able to identify security problems, respond accordingly, and inform appropriate individuals. A wide range of possible security problems may exist; some will be internal to custom applications, while others apply to off-the-shelf products. Additionally, problems can be software- or hardware-based.

The more responsive and knowledgeable system support and operation staff personnel are, the less user support will be provided informally. The support other users provide can be valuable, but they may not be aware of all the issues across the organization or how they are related.

## 8.2 Software Support
Software is the heart of an organization's system operations, whatever the size and complexity of the system. Therefore, it is essential that software function correctly and be protected from corruption. There are many elements of software support.

The first element is controlling what software is used on a system. If users or systems personnel can install and execute any software on a system, the system is more vulnerable to viruses, unexpected software interactions, and software that may subvert or bypass security controls. One method of controlling software is to inspect or test software before it is installed (e.g., determine compatibility with custom applications, identify other unforeseen interactions).# Software Support and Configuration Management

## Software Support

This can apply to new software packages, upgrades, off-the-shelf products, or to custom software, as deemed appropriate. In addition to controlling the installation and execution of new software, organizations also oversee the configuration and use of powerful system utilities. System utilities can compromise the integrity of operating systems and logical access controls.

The second element in software support can be to ensure that software has not been modified without proper authorization. This involves the protection of software and backup copies and can be done with a combination of logical and physical access controls. Many organizations also include a program to ensure that software is properly licensed, as required. For example, an organization may audit systems for illegal copies of copyrighted software. This problem is primarily associated with user systems (or devices), but can apply to any type of system.

## Configuration Management

Closely related to software support is configuration management—the process of tracking and approving changes to the system. Configuration management can be formal or informal and normally addresses hardware, software, networking, and other changes. The primary security goal of configuration management is to ensure that changes to the system do not unintentionally or unknowingly diminish security. Some of the methods discussed under software support (e.g., such as inspecting and testing software changes) can be used. Chapter 7 discusses other methods.

Note that the security goal is to know what changes occur, not to prevent security from being changed. There may be circumstances under which reducing security is deemed an acceptable risk due to the need to accomplish the mission. In such cases, the decrease in security is based on a decision by the authorizing official who considered all appropriate factors. Furthermore, the resulting increase in risk is monitored on an ongoing basis.

A second security goal of configuration management is to ensure that changes to the system are reflected in other documentation, such as the contingency plan. If the change is major, it may be necessary to reanalyze some or all of the security of the system. This is discussed in section 10.15.

## Backups

Support and operations personnel and sometimes users back up software and data. This function is critical to contingency planning. The frequency of backups depends on how often data changes and how important those changes are. Consult with system administrators to determine what backup schedule is appropriate. Also, it is important to test that backup copies are actually usable. Finally, store backups securely (discussed below).

## Media Controls

Media controls include a variety of measures to provide physical and environmental protection and accountability for digital and non-digital media. Examples of digital media include diskettes,# Media Controls

Magnetic tapes, external/removable hard disk drives, flash drives, compact disks, and digital video disks are examples of digital media. Non-digital media includes paper and microfilm. From a security perspective, media controls are designed to prevent the loss of confidentiality, integrity, or availability of information, including data or software, when stored or disseminated outside of the system. This can include storage of information before it is input into the system and after it is output.

The extent of media control depends on many factors, including the type of data, the quantity of media, and the nature of the user environment. Physical and environmental protection is used to prevent unauthorized individuals from accessing the media and protects against such factors as heat, cold, or harmful magnetic fields. When necessary, logging the use of individual media (e.g., a tape cartridge) provides detailed accountability—so that organizations may hold authorized individuals responsible for their actions. For more information on media protection, see section 10.10.

## Documentation

Documentation of all aspects of system support and operations is important to ensure continuity and consistency. Formalizing operational practices and procedures with sufficient detail helps to eliminate security lapses and oversights, gives new personnel sufficiently detailed instructions, and provides a quality assurance function to help ensure that operations are performed correctly and efficiently.

The specific security implementation details of a system are also documented. This includes many types of documentation, such as security plans, contingency plans, risk analyses, and security policies and procedures. Much of this information, particularly risk and threat analyses, has to be protected against unauthorized disclosure. Security documentation also needs to be both current and accessible. Accessibility takes special factors into consideration such as the need to find the contingency plan during a disaster.

Some security documentation may need to be designed to fulfill the needs of different system roles. For this reason, many organizations separate documentation into policy and procedures. A security procedures manual may be written to inform system users on how to do their jobs securely. For systems operations and support staff, a security procedures manual may address a wide variety of technical and operational concerns in considerable detail.

## Maintenance

System maintenance requires either physical or logical access to the system. Support and operations staff, hardware or software vendors, or third-party service providers may maintain a system. Maintenance may be performed on-site or remotely via communications connections. It may also be necessary to move equipment to a repair site for maintenance. If someone who does not typically have access to the system performs maintenance, then a security...# Vulnerability Management

## Introduction
Vulnerability is introduced in various systems, and in some circumstances, it may be necessary to take additional precautions (e.g., background investigation of service personnel) to prevent issues such as "snooping around" the physical area. However, once someone has access to the system, it is very difficult for supervision to prevent damage done through the maintenance process.

## Maintenance Accounts
Many systems provide maintenance accounts. These special login accounts are normally preconfigured at the factory with pre-set, widely-known passwords. It is critical to change these passwords or otherwise limit access to the accounts.

### Procedures for Access Control
Develop procedures to ensure that only authorized maintenance personnel have access to the preconfigured accounts. If the account is to be used remotely, authentication of the maintenance provider can be performed using call-back confirmation. This helps ensure that remote diagnostic activities actually originate from an established phone number at the vendor's site.

### Additional Security Techniques
Other helpful techniques include:
- **Encryption and Decryption** of diagnostic communications
- **Strong Identification and Authentication Techniques** such as tokens
- **Remote Disconnect Verification**

## Diagnostic Ports
Manufacturers of larger systems and third-party providers may offer more diagnostic and support services, and larger systems may have diagnostic ports. It is critical to ensure that these ports are:
- Only used by authorized personnel
- Cannot be accessed by malicious users
- Only active when required

## Interdependencies
There are support and operations components in most of the controls discussed in this publication, such as:

### Personnel
Most support and operations staff have special access to the system. Some organizations conduct background checks on individuals in these positions. (See section 10.13)

### Incident Handling
Support and operations may include an organization's incident handling staff. Even if they are separate organizations, they need to work together to recognize and respond to incidents. (See section 10.8)

### Contingency Planning
Support and operations normally provide technical input to contingency planning and carry out the activities of creating backups, updating documentation, and practicing responses to contingencies. (See section 10.6)

### Security Awareness, Training, and Education
Support and operations staff are trained in security procedures and aware of the importance of security. In addition, they provide technical expertise needed to teach users how to secure their systems. (See section 10.2)

### Physical and Environmental Controls
Support and operations staff often control the immediate physical area around the system. (See section 10.11)

### Technical Controls
The technical controls are installed, maintained, and used by support and operations staff. They create the user accounts and add users to access control.# Security in Support and Operations

## Operational Tasks
- Review audit logs for unusual activity
- Control bulk encryption over telecommunications links
- Perform countless operational tasks needed to use technical controls effectively

## Role of Support and Operations Staff
Support and operations staff provide needed input to the selection of controls based on their knowledge of system capabilities and operational constraints. (See Chapter 10)

### Assurance
Support and operations staff ensure that changes to a system do not introduce security vulnerabilities by using assurance methods to evaluate or test the changes and their effects on the system. Operational assurance is normally performed by support and operations staff. (See Chapter 7)

## Cost Considerations
The cost of ensuring adequate security in day-to-day support and operations is largely dependent upon the size and characteristics of the operating environment and the nature of the processing being performed.

- It may not be necessary to hire additional support and operations security specialists.
- If sufficient support personnel are already available, it is important that they be trained in the security aspects of their assigned jobs. Initial and ongoing training is a cost of successfully incorporating security measures into support and operations activities.
- Another cost is associated with creating and updating documentation to ensure that security concerns are appropriately reflected in support and operations policies, procedures, and duties.

# Cryptography

Cryptography is a branch of mathematics based on the transformation of data. It is an important tool for protecting information and is used in many aspects of information security. For example, cryptography can help provide data confidentiality and integrity. These security objectives can be accomplished using various cryptographic algorithms such as electronic signatures and advanced user authentication.

Although modern cryptography relies upon advanced mathematics, users can reap its benefits without understanding its mathematical underpinnings.

## NIST Publications
NIST has published an array of Special Publications (SPs) and Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS) that are applicable to the use of cryptography within the Federal Government. A list of such SPs and FIPS can be found in Appendix A of NIST SP 800-175B, *Guideline for Using Crypto Standards: Cryptographic Mechanisms*.

Public Laws, Presidential Executive Orders and Directives, and other guidance from organizations in the Executive Office of the President drive the SPs and FIPS written by NIST. Legislative mandates, policies, and directives specific to cryptography are introduced in NIST SP 800-175A, *Guideline for Using Crypto Standards: Directives, Mandates, and Policies*.

## Conclusion
Cryptography alone will not satisfy the information assurance needs of any organization. Rather, when combined with other security measures, cryptography is a useful tool for enhancing security.# Chapter 9: Cryptography and Information Security

This chapter describes fundamental aspects of the basic cryptographic technologies and some specific ways cryptography can be applied to improve security. The chapter also explores some of the important issues to be considered when incorporating cryptography into systems.

## 9.1 Uses of Cryptography

Cryptography is used to protect data both inside and outside the boundaries of a system. Data within a system may be sufficiently protected with logical and physical access controls (perhaps supplemented by cryptography). However, outside of the system, cryptography is sometimes the only way to protect data. For instance, data cannot be protected by the originator’s logical or physical access controls when in transit across communications lines or resident on another system. Cryptography provides a solution by protecting data even when the data is no longer in the control of the originator.

### 9.1.1 Data Encryption

One of the best ways to obtain cost-effective data confidentiality is through the use of encryption. Encryption transforms intelligible data, called plaintext, into an unintelligible form, called ciphertext. This is reversed through the process of decryption. One way to protect electronic data is by using the Advanced Encryption Standard (AES). The AES algorithm is a cryptographic algorithm that can be used to encrypt and decrypt information. Once data is encrypted, the ciphertext does not have to be protected against disclosure. However, if ciphertext is modified, it will not decrypt correctly. A more comprehensive explanation of AES can be found in FIPS 197, Advanced Encryption Standard (AES).

Both secret and public key cryptography can be used for data encryption, although not all public key algorithms provide for data encryption. To use a secret key algorithm, data is encrypted using a specific key. The same key must be used to decrypt the data. When public key cryptography is used for encryption, any party may use any other party's public key to encrypt a message. However, only the party with the corresponding private key can decrypt, and thus read, the message.

There are several reasons to choose one form of cryptography over the other. For example, an organization may decide to go with public key cryptography because it is more secure and convenient to use since private keys do not have to be transmitted to anyone. In order for secret-key cryptography to function, the secret keys must be transmitted due to the fact that the same key is used for the encryption and decryption of that specific data.

More detailed guidance on public key infrastructure (PKI) is available in:
- NIST SP 800-32, Introduction to Public Key Technology and the Federal PKI Infrastructure
- NIST SP 800-57 Part 3, Recommendation for Key Management: Part 3 – Application Specific Key Management Guidance
- NIST SP 800-152, A Profile for U.S. Federal Cryptographic Key Management# Systems (CKMS)

## 9.1.2 Integrity

Integrity is a property whereby data has not been altered in an unauthorized manner since it was created, transmitted, or stored. In systems, it is not always possible for humans to scan information to determine if data has been erased, added, or modified. Even if scanning were possible, the individual may have no way of knowing what the correct data is supposed to be.

For example, "do" may be changed to "do not," or $1,000 may be changed to $10,000. It is therefore desirable to have an automated means of detecting both intentional and unintentional modifications of data.

While error detection codes (e.g., parity bits) have long been used in communications protocols to detect unintentional modifications, an attacker intercepting and modifying the message can also replace the message’s error detection code. Cryptography can effectively detect both intentional and unintentional modification.

## 9.1.3 Electronic Signatures

Today's systems store and process documents in electronic form. Having documents in electronic form permits rapid processing and transmission and improves overall efficiency. The approval of a paper document has traditionally been indicated by a written signature. What is needed, therefore, is the electronic equivalent of a written signature that can be recognized as having the same legal status as a written signature.

In addition to the integrity protections discussed above, cryptography can provide a means of linking a document with a particular person, as is done with a written signature. Electronic signatures can use either secret key or public key cryptography. However, public key methods are generally easier to use.

Simply taking a digital picture of a written signature does not provide adequate security. Such a digitized written signature could easily be copied from one electronic document to another with no way to determine whether it is legitimate. Electronic signatures, on the other hand, can be validated uniquely for one message and only for that message.

For example, a cryptographic hash function, like SHA-3, can be used to increase the security and efficiency of a digital signature providing assurance that the original message could not have been altered to a different message with the same hash value, and hence, the same signature. To learn more about cryptographic hash functions, specifically SHA-3, see FIPS 202, SHA-3 Standard: Permutation-Based Hash and Extendable-Output Functions.

### 9.1.3.1 Secret Key Electronic Signatures

An electronic signature can be implemented using secret key message authentication codes, or MACs. For example, if two parties share a secret key, and one party receives data with a MAC that is correctly verified using the shared key, that party may assume that the other party signed the data. This also assumes that the two parties trust each other. Through the use of a MAC, data integrity and a form of electronic signature are obtained.# Electronic Signatures and User Authentication

## 9.1 Electronic Signatures

### 9.1.3.2 Public Key Electronic Signatures
Another type of electronic signature is called a digital signature and is implemented using public key cryptography. Data is electronically signed by applying the originator's private key to the data. (The exact mathematical process for doing this is not important for this discussion.) To increase the speed of the process, the private key is applied to a shorter form of the data, called a "hash" or "message digest," rather than to the entire set of data. The resulting digital signature can be stored or transmitted along with the data. The signature can be verified by any party using the public key of the signer. This feature is very useful, for example, when distributing signed copies of virus-free software. Any recipient can verify that the program remains virus-free. If the signature verifies properly, then the verifier has confidence that the data was not modified after being signed and that the owner of the public key was the signer.

NIST has published standards for a digital signature and a secure hash for use by the federal government in FIPS 186-4, Digital Signature Standard and FIPS 180-4, Secure Hash Standard.

## 9.1.4 User Authentication
Authentication is a process that provides assurance of the source of information to a receiving entity. Cryptography can increase security in user authentication techniques. As discussed in section 10.7, cryptography is the basis for several advanced authentication methods. Instead of communicating passwords over an open network, authentication can be performed by demonstrating knowledge of a cryptographic key. Using these methods, a one-time password, which is not susceptible to eavesdropping, can be used. User authentication can use either secret or public key cryptography.

## 9.2 Implementation Issues
This section explores several important issues to consider when using (e.g., designing, implementing, integrating) cryptography in a system. NIST has developed several FIPS and SPs that apply to the implementation of cryptography in federal information and federal systems. A list of these FIPS and SPs is located in Appendix A of NIST SP 800-175B.

### 9.2.1 Selecting Design and Implementation Standards
NIST and other organizations have developed numerous standards for designing, implementing, and using cryptography and for integrating it into automated systems. By using these standards, organizations can reduce costs and protect their investments in technology. Standards provide solutions that have been accepted by a wide community and reviewed by experts in relevant areas. Standards help ensure interoperability among different vendors' equipment, thus allowing an organization to select from various products in order to find cost-effective solutions. Managers and users of systems choose the appropriate cryptographic standard based on a cost-effectiveness analysis, trends in the standard's acceptance, and...# Interoperability Requirements

In addition, each standard is carefully analyzed to determine if it is applicable to the organization and the desired application.

## 9.2.2 Deciding between Software, Hardware, or Firmware Implementations

The trade-offs among security, cost, simplicity, efficiency, and ease of implementation need to be studied by managers acquiring various security products meeting a standard. Cryptography can be implemented in software, hardware, or firmware. Each has its related costs and benefits.

In general, software is less expensive and slower than hardware, although for large applications, hardware may be less expensive. In addition, software may be less secure, since it is more easily modified or bypassed than equivalent hardware products. Tamper resistance in hardware is usually considered more reliable.

In many cases, cryptography is implemented in a hardware device (e.g., electronic chip, ROM-protected processor), but is controlled by software. This software requires integrity protection to ensure that the hardware device is provided with correct information (e.g., controls, data) and is not bypassed. Thus, a hybrid solution is generally provided, even when the basic cryptography is implemented in hardware. Effective security requires correct management of the entire hybrid solution.

Firmware can be found in nearly every piece of technology used today, including cell phones, smart TVs, and even in USB keyboards. Thus, securing firmware implementations is critical. One way to protect your system is by purchasing hardware with built-in protection that prevents malicious firmware modification. For more information on hardening firmware, refer to NIST SP 800-147, BIOS Protection Guidelines, and NIST SP 800-155 (DRAFT), BIOS Integrity Measurement Guidelines.

## 9.2.3 Managing Keys

The security of information protected by cryptography directly depends upon the protection afforded to keys. All keys need to be protected against modification, and secret and private keys require protection against unauthorized disclosure. Key management involves the procedures and protocols, both manual and automated, used throughout the entire life cycle of the keys. This includes the generation, distribution, storage, entry, use, destruction, and archiving of cryptographic keys.

In a small community of users, public keys and their "owners" can be strongly bound by simply exchanging public keys (e.g., putting them on a CD-ROM or other media). However, conducting electronic business on a larger scale—potentially involving geographically and organizationally distributed users—necessitates a means for obtaining public keys electronically with a high degree of confidence in their integrity and binding to individuals. The support for the binding between a key and its owner is generally referred to as a public key infrastructure.

Users also need the ability to enter the community of key holders, generate keys (or have them...# Key Management and Cryptographic Security

## Key Management

Key management involves several critical functions, including:

- Generating keys (on behalf of users)
- Disseminating public keys
- Revoking keys (e.g., in case of private key compromise)
- Changing keys

Additionally, it may be necessary to incorporate time/date stamping and to archive keys for the verification of old signatures. For more information on key management, refer to:

- **NIST SP 800-57 Part 1**: Recommendation for Key Management, Part 1: General
- **NIST SP 800-57 Part 2**: Recommendation for Key Management, Part 2: Best Practices for Key Management Organization
- **NIST SP 800-57 Part 3**

## Security of Cryptographic Modules

Cryptography is typically implemented in a module of software, firmware, hardware, or a combination thereof. This module contains:

- Cryptographic algorithm(s)
- Certain control parameters
- Temporary storage facilities for the key(s) being used by the algorithm(s)

The proper functioning of cryptography requires the secure design, implementation, and use of the cryptographic module, including protection against tampering.

Conformance to standards is important for various reasons, including interoperability and the strength of security provided. NIST established the **Cryptographic Module Validation Program (CMVP)**, which validates cryptographic modules to **FIPS 140-2**, Security Requirements for Cryptographic Modules. The goal of the CMVP is to promote the use of validated cryptographic modules and provide federal agencies with a security metric for procuring equipment containing validated cryptographic modules. A list of validated modules is available on the **Computer Security Resource Center (CSRC)** website.

### FIPS 140-2 Security Requirements

FIPS 140-2 specifies the security requirements that a cryptographic module must satisfy when utilized within a security system protecting sensitive but unclassified information. The standard defines four security levels for cryptographic modules, with each level providing a significant increase in security over the preceding level. These levels allow for cost-effective solutions appropriate for varying degrees of data sensitivity and different application environments. Users can select the best module for any given application or system, avoiding unnecessary security features.

## Applying Cryptography to Networks

The use of cryptography within networking applications often requires special considerations. In these applications, the suitability of a cryptographic module may depend on its capability to handle special requirements imposed by locally attached communications equipment or by the network protocols and software.

Encrypted information, MACs, or digital signatures may require transparent communications protocols or equipment to avoid misinterpretation by the communications equipment or software as control information. It may be necessary to format the encrypted information, MAC, or digital signature to ensure that it does not confuse the communications equipment or software.

It is essential that cryptography satisfies the requirements imposed by the network environment.# Communications Equipment and Network Operations

Data is encrypted on a network using either link encryption or end-to-end encryption.

## Link Encryption
Link encryption is performed by service providers, such as a data communications provider. It encrypts all of the data along a communications path (e.g., a satellite link, telephone circuit, T3 line). Since link encryption also encrypts routing data, communications nodes need to decrypt the data to continue routing.

## End-to-End Encryption
In contrast, end-to-end encryption encrypts data when being passed through a network, but routing information remains visible. End-to-end encryption is generally performed by the end user organization. Some examples of modern usage of end-to-end encryption include:
- Pretty Good Privacy (PGP)
- Secure/Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions (S/MIME) for email.

It is possible to combine both types of encryption.

## Complying with Export Rules
The U.S. Government controls the export of cryptographic implementations. The rules governing export can be quite complex since they consider multiple factors. Additionally, cryptography is a rapidly evolving field, and rules may change from time to time. Address questions concerning the export of cryptographic implementations to the appropriate legal counsel.

# Interdependencies

There are many interdependencies among cryptography and other security controls highlighted in this publication. Cryptography both depends on other security safeguards and assists in providing them. For example:

## Physical Security
Physical protection of a cryptographic module is required to prevent—or at least detect—physical replacement or modification of the cryptographic system and the keys within it. In many environments (e.g., open offices, laptops), the cryptographic module itself has to provide the desired levels of physical security. In other environments (e.g., closed communications facilities, steel-encased Cash-Issuing Terminals), a cryptographic module may be safely employed within a secured facility.

## User Authentication
Cryptography can be used both to protect passwords that are stored in systems and to protect passwords that are communicated between systems. Furthermore, cryptographic-based authentication techniques may be used in conjunction with or in place of password-based techniques to provide stronger authentication of users.

## Logical Access Control
In many cases, cryptographic software may be embedded within a host system, and it may not be feasible to provide extensive physical protection to the host system. In these cases, logical access control may provide a means of isolating the cryptographic software from other parts of the host system, protect the cryptographic software from tampering, and safeguard the keys from replacement or disclosure. The use of such controls provides the equivalent of physical protection.

## Audit Trails
Cryptography may play a useful role in audit trails.# Cryptographic Systems and Their Assurance

## Introduction
Cryptographic systems are essential for ensuring the integrity and security of electronic signatures and audit records. These systems require robust measures to protect against unauthorized disclosure or modification.

## Assurance
Assurance in cryptographic modules is crucial for effective cryptography usage. The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) maintains validation programs for several cryptographic standards (see section 9.2.4). Vendors can validate their products through rigorous testing, which enhances confidence among system designers, integrators, and users regarding the compliance of these products with accepted standards.

### Monitoring and Auditing
Cryptographic systems undergo regular monitoring and audits to ensure they meet security objectives. This includes:

- Reviewing all parameters associated with the correct operation of the cryptographic system.
- Periodically testing the operation of the system.
- Auditing the results of these tests.

Certain sensitive information, such as secret keys or private keys in public key systems, is not subject to audit. However, non-secret or non-private keys can be utilized in simulated audit procedures.

## Cost Considerations
Implementing cryptography to protect information incurs both direct and indirect costs, influenced by product availability. Various products are available for cryptographic implementation, including integrated circuits, add-on boards, adapters, and stand-alone units.

### Direct Costs
The direct costs associated with cryptography include:

- **Acquisition and Implementation**: Costs related to acquiring or implementing the cryptographic module and integrating it into the system. Factors such as the medium (hardware, software, firmware, or a combination), security level, logical and physical configuration, and special processing requirements can affect these costs.

- **Management**: Costs for managing cryptography, including cryptographic key generation, distribution, archiving, disposal, and security measures to protect the keys.

### Indirect Costs
Indirect costs of cryptography may include:

- **Performance Impact**: A decrease in system or network performance due to the overhead of applying cryptographic protection to stored or communicated data.

- **User Interaction Changes**: Modifications in how users interact with the system due to stricter security enforcement. However, cryptography can be designed to be nearly transparent to users, minimizing the impact.

## Control Families
To ensure the protection of confidentiality, integrity, and availability, FIPS 200 specifies minimum security requirements across multiple security-related areas.# Information Security Program Overview

The information security program outlined below addresses the management, operational, and technical aspects of protecting federal information and systems. This section provides a brief description of each security control family, each of which contains a list of controls that address a specific security goal. For a complete security control catalog and a description of all controls, refer to NIST SP 800-53.

## 10.1 Access Control (AC)

The requirements for using—and prohibitions against the use of—various system resources vary considerably from one system to another. For example, some information must be accessible to all users, some may be needed by several groups or departments, and some may be accessed by only a few individuals. While users must have access to specific information needed to perform their jobs, denial of access to non-job-related information may be required. It may also be important to control the kind of access that is permitted (e.g., the ability for the average user to execute, but not change, system programs). These types of access restrictions enforce policy and help ensure that unauthorized actions are not taken.

Access is the ability to make use of any system resource. Access control is the process of granting or denying specific requests to:
1. Obtain and use information and related information processing services.
2. Enter specific physical facilities (e.g., federal buildings, military establishments, border crossing entrances).

System-based access controls are called logical access controls. Logical access controls can prescribe not only who or what (in the case of a process) is to have access to a specific system resource, but also the type of access that is permitted. These controls may be built into the operating system, incorporated into application programs or major utilities (e.g., database management systems, communications systems), or implemented through add-on security packages. Logical access controls may be implemented internally to the system being protected or in external devices.

### Examples of Access Control Security Controls
- Account management
- Separation of duties
- Least privilege
- Session lock
- Information flow enforcement
- Session termination

Organizations limit:
- System access to authorized users
- Processes acting on behalf of authorized users
- Devices, including other systems
- The types of transactions and functions that authorized users are permitted to exercise

## 10.2 Awareness and Training (AT)

Often, it is the user community that is recognized as being the weakest link in securing systems. This is due to users not being aware of how their actions may impact the security of a system. Making system users aware of their security responsibilities and teaching them correct practices helps change their behavior. It also supports individual accountability, which is one of the most important ways to improve information security. Without knowing the necessary practices, users may inadvertently compromise the security of the system.# Security Measures and Training

## Importance of Training
The importance of training in information security is emphasized in the Computer Security Act, which mandates training for individuals involved in the management, use, and operation of federal systems. The purpose of information security awareness, training, and education is to enhance security by:

1. Raising awareness of the need to protect system resources.
2. Developing skills and knowledge so system users can perform their jobs more securely.
3. Building in-depth knowledge as needed to design, implement, or operate security programs for organizations and systems.

Organizations are responsible for ensuring that managers and users are aware of the security risks associated with their activities and that personnel are adequately trained to carry out their information security-related duties and responsibilities.

## Examples of Awareness and Training Security Controls
- Security awareness training
- Role-based security training
- Security training records

Organizations must:
1. Ensure that managers and users of organizational systems are made aware of the security risks associated with their activities and of the applicable laws, executive orders, directives, policies, standards, instructions, regulations, or procedures related to the security of organizational systems.
2. Ensure that organizational personnel are adequately trained to carry out their assigned information security-related duties and responsibilities.

## Audit and Accountability (AU)

### Definition of Audit
An audit is an independent review and examination of records and activities to assess the adequacy of system controls and ensure compliance with established policies and operational procedures.

### Audit Trails
An audit trail is a record of individuals who have accessed a system and the operations performed by the user during a given period. Audit trails maintain a record of system activity both by system and application processes and by user activity of systems and applications.

In conjunction with appropriate tools and procedures, audit trails can assist in detecting security violations, performance issues, and flaws in applications. They may serve as:

- **Support for Regular System Operations**: Used to help system administrators ensure that the system or resources have not been harmed by hackers, insiders, or technical problems.
- **Insurance Policy**: Maintained but not used unless needed (e.g., after a system outage).

### Examples of Audit and Accountability Controls
- Audit events
- Time stamps
- Non-repudiation
- Protection of audit information
- Audit record retention
- Session audit

### Organizational Responsibilities
Organizations must:
1. Create, protect, and retain system audit records to the extent needed to enable the monitoring, analysis, investigation, and reporting of unlawful, unauthorized, or inappropriate system activity.
2. Ensure that the actions of individual system users can be uniquely traced to those users so they can be held accountable.# 10.4 Assessment, Authorization, and Monitoring (CA)

A security control assessment is the testing and/or evaluation of the management, operational, and technical security controls on a system to determine the extent to which the controls are implemented correctly, operating as intended, and producing the desired outcome with respect to meeting the security requirements for the system. The assessment also helps determine if the implemented controls are the most effective and cost-efficient solution for the function they are intended to serve.

Assessment of the security controls is done on a continuous basis to support a near real-time analysis of the organization’s current security posture. Following a complete and thorough security control assessment, the authorizing official makes the decision to authorize the system to operate (for a new system) or to continue to operate.

Examples of security assessment and authorization controls include: security assessments, system interconnections, plans of action and milestones, and continuous monitoring.

Organizations:
1. Periodically assess the security controls in organizational systems to determine if the controls are effective in their application.
2. Develop and implement plans of action designed to correct deficiencies and reduce or eliminate vulnerabilities in organizational systems.
3. Authorize the operation of organizational systems and any associated system connections.
4. Monitor security controls on an ongoing basis to ensure the continued effectiveness of the controls.

# 10.5 Configuration Management (CM)

Configuration management is a collection of activities focused on establishing and maintaining the integrity of information technology products and systems through the control of processes for initializing, changing, and monitoring the configurations of those products and systems throughout the SDLC.

Configuration management consists of determining and documenting the appropriate specific settings for a system, conducting security impact analyses, and managing changes through a change control board. It allows the entire system to be reviewed to help ensure that a change made on one system does not have adverse effects on another system. For more information on configuration management, see NIST SP 800-128.

Common secure configurations (also known as security configuration checklists) provide recognized, standardized, and established benchmarks that stipulate secure configuration settings for information technology platforms and products. Once implemented, checklists can be used to verify that changes to the system have been reviewed from a security point-of-view.

A common audit examines the system's configuration to see if major changes (such as connecting to the Internet) have occurred that have not yet been analyzed. The NIST checklist repository, maintained as part of the National Vulnerability Database (NVD), provides multiple checklists which can be used to check compliance with the secure configuration specified in...# The System Security Plan

The checklists can be accessed at NIST NCP Repository.

## Configuration Management Controls

Examples of configuration management controls include:
- Baseline configuration
- Configuration change control
- Security impact analysis
- Least functionality
- Software usage restrictions

Organizations:
1. Establish and maintain baseline configurations and inventories of organizational systems, including hardware, software, firmware, and documentation throughout the respective SDLC.
2. Establish and enforce security configuration settings for information technology products employed in organizational systems.

## 10.6 Contingency Planning (CP)

An information security contingency is an event with the potential to disrupt system operations, thereby disrupting critical mission and business functions. Such an event could be a power outage, hardware failure, fire, or storm. Particularly destructive events are often referred to as “disasters.” To avert potential contingencies and disasters or minimize the damage they cause, organizations can take early steps to control the outcome of the event. Generally, this activity is called contingency planning.

A contingency plan is a management policy and procedure used to guide organizational response to a perceived loss of mission capability. The System Contingency Plan (SCP) is used by risk managers to determine what happened, why, and what to do. The SCP may point to the Continuity of Operations Plan (COOP) or Disaster Recovery Plan (DRP) for major disruptions.

Contingency planning involves more than planning for a move offsite after a disaster destroys a data center. It also addresses how to keep an organization's critical functions operational in the event of disruptions, both large and small. This broader perspective on contingency planning is based on the distribution of system support throughout an organization. For more information on contingency planning, see NIST SP 800-34.

### Examples of Contingency Planning Controls

Examples of contingency planning controls include:
- Contingency plan
- Contingency training
- Contingency plan testing
- System backup
- System recovery and reconstitution

Organizations:
1. Establish, maintain, and effectively implement plans for emergency response.
2. Backup operations.
3. Oversee post-disaster recovery for organizational systems to ensure the availability of critical information resources and the continuity of operations in emergency situations.

## 10.7 Identification and Authentication (IA)

For most systems, identification and authentication is often the first line of defense. Identification is the means of verifying the identity of a user, process, or device, typically as a prerequisite for granting access to resources in a system. Identification and authentication is a technical measure that prevents unauthorized individuals or processes from entering a system.

Identification and authentication is a critical building block of information security since it is the...# Access Control and User Accountability

Access control is a fundamental aspect of security that ensures user accountability. It often requires systems to identify and differentiate between users.

## Least Privilege

Access control is frequently based on the principle of least privilege, which means granting users only the access necessary to perform their duties. User accountability necessitates linking activities on a system to specific individuals, which requires the system to identify users.

## Authentication Challenges

Systems recognize individuals based on the authentication data they receive. However, authentication presents several challenges, including:

- Collecting authentication data
- Transmitting the data securely
- Ensuring that the individual who was originally authenticated is still the one using the system

For instance, a user may leave a terminal while still logged in, allowing another person to start using it.

## Methods of Authentication

There are four means of authenticating a user's identity that can be used alone or in combination:

1. **Something the individual knows** – e.g., a password or Personal Identification Number (PIN)
2. **Something the individual possesses** (a token) – e.g., an ATM card or a smart card
3. **Something the individual is** (static biometric) – e.g., fingerprint, retina, face
4. **Something the individual does** (dynamic biometrics) – e.g., voice pattern, handwriting, typing rhythm

While any of these methods could provide strong authentication, each has associated problems. For example, an individual could impersonate someone else by guessing or learning their password or by stealing or fabricating tokens.

## Drawbacks of Authentication Methods

Each method also presents challenges for legitimate users and system administrators:

- Users may forget passwords or lose tokens.
- Administrative overhead for managing identification and authorization data and tokens can be substantial.
- Biometric systems face significant technical, user acceptance, and cost issues.

## Identification and Authentication Controls

Examples of identification and authentication controls include:

- Device identification and authentication
- Identifier management
- Authenticator management
- Authenticator feedback
- Re-authentication

Organizations must (i) identify system users, processes acting on behalf of users, or devices, and (ii) authenticate or verify the identities of those users, processes, or devices as a prerequisite to allowing access to organizational systems.

# Individual Participation (IP)

Engagement with individuals whose information is being processed by a system is crucial for privacy protection and the development of trustworthy systems. The functioning of a system can significantly impact people's quality of life and their ability to be autonomous individuals. Effective engagement can help mitigate risks and prevent various problems, such as individuals feeling surveilled by a system.# Chilling Effects on Ordinary Behavior

Creating chilling effects on ordinary behavior can lead individuals to alter their interactions with systems in unexpected ways. Users may feel that their information has been appropriated or used for profit or organizational gain without their permission or sufficient economic benefit.

## Impact of Excluding Access to Information

Excluding access to information can affect data quality, potentially leading to adverse decision-making about users. This may include inappropriate restrictions on access to products or services or other types of discrimination.

## Individual Participation Controls

The Individual Participation controls address user interaction with the system, enabling users to develop reliable assumptions about how their information is being processed. These controls create touchpoints for better engagement with the system and the management of their information.

### Benefits of Individual Participation

Users who can participate in decisions about their information processing are more likely to trust the system and engage with it constructively. Furthermore, enabling users to correct inaccurate information can improve system functioning and protect them from issues arising from the processing of inaccurate information.

### Notification and Engagement

With Individual Participation controls, organizations keep individuals informed about the processing of their Personally Identifiable Information (PII). These controls also engage individuals as active participants in the decision-making process regarding their PII through:

- Information access
- Consent options
- The ability to correct or amend PII through appropriate redress mechanisms

### Examples of Individual Participation Controls

Examples of individual participation controls include:

- Consent
- Redress
- Privacy notice
- Privacy act statements for federal agencies
- Individual access

Organizations should:

1. Request consent for processing PII.
2. Provide access to PII and redress opportunities for individuals to amend or correct PII.
3. Provide notice to individuals regarding the processing of PII.

## Incident Response (IR)

Systems are subject to a wide range of threat events, from corrupted data files to viruses to natural disasters. Vulnerability to some threat events can be mitigated by having relevant standard operating procedures that can be followed in the event of an incident.

### Examples of Threat Events

- **Frequent Events**: Mistakenly deleting a file can usually be repaired through restoration from a backup file.
- **Severe Threat Events**: Outages caused by natural disasters are typically addressed in an organization's contingency plan.
- **Malicious Threats**: Threat events can also result from a virus, other malicious code, or a system intruder (either an insider or an outsider).

### Technical Response

Threat events can refer to incidents that could result in severe damage without a technical expert response. An example of a threat event requiring immediate technical response would be an organization experiencing a denial-of-service attack, which necessitates swift action.# Incident Response

Part of the incident response team in order to reduce the effect the attack will have on the organization. The definition of a threat event is somewhat flexible and may vary by organization and computing environment.

Although the threats that hackers and malicious code pose to systems and networks are well known, the occurrence of such harmful events remains unpredictable. Security incidents on larger networks (e.g., the Internet), such as break-ins and service disruptions, have harmed various organizations' computing capabilities. When initially confronted with such incidents, most organizations respond in an ad hoc manner. However, recurrence of similar incidents can make it cost-beneficial to develop a standard capability for quick discovery of and response to such events. This is especially true since incidents can often "spread" when left unchecked, thus escalating the damage and seriously harming an organization.

## Incident Handling

Incident handling is closely related to contingency planning. An incident handling capability may be viewed as a component of contingency planning because it allows for the ability to react quickly and efficiently to disruptions in normal processing. Broadly speaking, contingency planning addresses events with the potential to interrupt system operations. Incident handling can be considered that portion of contingency planning specifically that responds to malicious technical threats. For more information on incident response, see NIST SP 800-61, Computer Security Incident Handling Guide.

### Examples of Incident Response Controls

- Incident response training
- Incident response testing
- Incident handling
- Incident monitoring
- Incident reporting

Organizations should:

1. Establish an operational incident handling capability for organizational systems that includes adequate preparation, detection, analysis, containment, recovery, and user response activities.
2. Track, document, and report incidents to appropriate organizational officials and/or authorities.

# Maintenance (MA)

To keep systems in good working order and to minimize risks from hardware and software failures, it is paramount that organizations establish procedures for the maintenance of organizational systems. There are many different ways an organization can address these maintenance requirements.

## Controlled Maintenance

Controlled maintenance of a system deals with maintenance that is scheduled and performed in accordance with the manufacturer’s specifications. Maintenance performed outside of a scheduled cycle, known as corrective maintenance, occurs when a system fails or generates an error condition that must be corrected in order to return the system to operational conditions.

Maintenance can be performed locally or non-locally. Nonlocal maintenance is any maintenance or diagnostics performed by individuals communicating through a network either internally or externally (e.g., the Internet).# Maintenance Controls

Examples of maintenance controls include: controlled maintenance, maintenance tools, nonlocal maintenance, maintenance personnel, and timely maintenance.

Organizations:
1. Perform periodic and timely maintenance on organizational systems.
2. Provide effective controls on the tools, techniques, mechanisms, and personnel used to conduct system maintenance.

## 10.11 Media Protection (MP)

Media protection is a control that addresses the defense of system media, which can be described as both digital and non-digital.

### Examples of Digital Media
- Diskettes
- Magnetic tapes
- External/removable hard disk drives
- Flash drives
- Compact disks
- Digital video disks

### Examples of Non-Digital Media
- Paper
- Microfilm

Media protections can restrict access and make media available to authorized personnel only, apply security labels to sensitive information, and provide instructions on how to remove information from media such that the information cannot be retrieved or reconstructed. Media protections also include physically controlling system media and ensuring accountability, as well as restricting mobile devices capable of storing and carrying information into or outside of restricted areas.

### Examples of Media Protection Controls
- Media access
- Media marking
- Media storage
- Media transport
- Media sanitization

Organizations:
1. Protect system media, both paper and digital.
2. Limit access to information on system media to authorized users.
3. Sanitize or destroy system media before disposal or release for reuse.

## 10.12 Privacy Authorization (PA)

To better protect individuals’ privacy and limit problems arising from system processing of their information, organizations should have a clear rationale for the collection, use, maintenance, and sharing of personally identifiable information (PII).

Overly broad collection and maintenance of information may create the potential for security vulnerabilities or allow for internal abuses or expanded uses that cross privacy boundaries. Individuals could be stigmatized by the release of their information or suffer from identity theft. Third parties with whom information is shared may disregard the purpose or context in which information is collected and use that information in a manner that contradicts individuals’ privacy interests. As a result, individuals could lose trust in these systems, which could lead to abandonment or threaten the adoption of new technologies, even those designed to improve access to public services.

Organizations may have to comply with external laws or regulations, as well as internal policies pertaining to the processing of PII. Privacy Authorization controls aid an organization in ensuring that it is only processing PII in ways that it has the authority for and clear purposes for doing so. This assurance facilitates an organization’s accountability for following relevant policies and minimizes potential noncompliance costs and reputational damage.# Documenting Privacy and Security Controls

Documenting this information also supports individuals’ understanding of a system’s processing of their Personally Identifiable Information (PII).

## Privacy Authorization Controls

Examples of privacy authorization controls include:
- Authority to collect
- Purpose specification
- Information sharing with external parties

Organizations:
1. Identify the legal bases that authorize particular PII collection, use, maintenance, and sharing.
2. Specify in their notices the purpose(s) for which PII is collected.
3. Manage the sharing of PII with external parties.

## Physical and Environmental Protection (PE)

The term physical and environmental security refers to measures taken to protect systems, buildings, and related supporting infrastructure against threats associated with their physical environment. Physical and environmental controls cover three broad areas:

### 1. Physical Facility

The physical facility is typically the building, other structure, or vehicle housing the system and network components. Systems can be characterized, based upon their operating location, as:
- **Static**: Installed in structures at fixed locations.
- **Mobile**: Installed in vehicles that perform the function of a structure, but not at a fixed location.
- **Portable**: May be operated in a wide variety of locations, including buildings, vehicles, or in the open.

The physical characteristics of these structures and vehicles determine the level of physical threats such as fire, roof leaks, or unauthorized access.

### 2. Geographic Operating Location

The facility's general geographic operating location determines the characteristics of natural threats, which include:
- Earthquakes
- Flooding
- Man-made threats such as burglary, civil disorders, or interception of transmissions and emanations
- Damaging nearby activities, including toxic chemical spills, explosions, fires, and electromagnetic interference from emitters (e.g., radars).

### 3. Supporting Facilities

Supporting facilities are those services (both technical and human) that maintain the operation of the system. The system's operation usually depends on supporting facilities such as electric power, heating and air conditioning, and telecommunications. The failure or substandard performance of these facilities may interrupt the operation of the system and cause physical damage to system hardware or stored data.

## Examples of Physical and Environmental Controls

Examples of physical and environmental controls include:
- Physical access authorizations
- Physical access control
- Monitoring physical access
- Emergency shutoff
- Emergency power
- Emergency lighting
- Alternate work site
- Information leakage
- Asset monitoring and tracking

Organizations:
1. Limit physical access to systems, equipment, and the respective operating environments to authorized individuals.
2. Protect the physical plant and support infrastructure for systems.
3. Provide supporting utilities for systems.
4. Protect systems against environmental hazards.
5. Provide appropriate environmental controls in facilities.# Current Page Overview

## 10.14 Planning (PL)

Systems have increasingly taken on a strategic role in the organization. They assist organizations in conducting their daily activities and support decision making. With proper planning, systems can provide a security level commensurate with the risk associated with the operation of the system, improve productivity and performance, and enable new ways of managing and organizing. Planning for systems is crucial in the development and implementation of the organization’s information security goals.

### System Security Plans (SSPs)

System security plans (SSPs) are developed to provide an overview of the security requirements of the system and how the security controls and control enhancements meet those security requirements. Having security controls in place alone does not guarantee the overall protection of a system. Organizations also need to develop, document, and disseminate how these controls are implemented, rules that describe the responsibility of users, and how the organization operates the system from the perspective of information security.

### Examples of Planning Controls

Examples of planning controls include:
- System security plan
- Rules of behavior
- Security concept of operations
- Information security architecture
- Central management

Organizations should develop, document, periodically update, and implement security plans for organizational systems that describe the security controls in place or planned for the system, as well as the rules of behavior for individuals accessing the systems.

## 10.15 Program Management (PM)

Systems and the information they process are critical to many organizations' ability to perform their missions and business functions. It makes sense that executives view system security as a management issue and seek to protect their organization's information technology resources as they would any other valuable asset. To do this effectively requires the development of a comprehensive management approach.

### Distribution of Security Programs

Many security programs, distributed throughout the organization, have different elements performing various functions. While this approach has benefits, the distribution of the system security functions in many organizations is haphazard, usually based upon history (i.e., who was available in the organization to do what when the need arose). Ideally, the distribution of system security functions is the result of a planned and integrated management philosophy.

### Managing System Security at Multiple Levels

Managing system security at multiple levels has its benefits. Each level contributes to the overall system security program with different types of expertise, authority, and resources. In general, higher-level officials (e.g., those at the headquarters, unit levels in the agency described above) better understand the organization as a whole and have more authority. On the other hand, lower-level officials (e.g., at the system facility and applications levels) are more familiar with the specific technical and procedural requirements and problems of the systems and users. The levels of system security program management are complementary; each can help the other.# Effective Program Management Controls

Examples of program management controls include:
- Information security program plan
- Information security resources
- Plan of action and milestone process
- System inventory
- Enterprise architecture
- Risk management strategy
- Insider threat program
- Threat awareness program

## 10.16 Personnel Security (PS)

Users play a vital role in protecting a system as many important issues in information security involve users, designers, implementers, and managers. How these individuals interact with the system and the level of access they need to do their jobs can also impact the system’s security posture. Almost no system can be secured without properly addressing these aspects of personnel security.

### Purpose of Personnel Security

Personnel security seeks to minimize the risk that staff (permanent, temporary, or contractor) pose to organizational assets through the malicious use or exploitation of their legitimate access to the organization’s resources. An organization’s status and reputation can be adversely affected by the actions of its employees. Employees may have access to extremely sensitive, confidential, or proprietary information, the disclosure of which can destroy an organization’s reputation or cripple it financially.

Therefore, organizations must be vigilant when recruiting and hiring new employees, as well as when an employee transfers or is terminated. The sensitive nature and value of organizational assets require in-depth personnel security measures.

### Examples of Personnel Control

Examples of personnel control include:
- Personnel screening
- Personnel termination
- Personnel transfer
- Access agreements
- Personnel sanctions

### Organizational Responsibilities

Organizations:
1. Ensure that individuals occupying positions of responsibility within organizations (including third-party service providers) are trustworthy and meet established security criteria for those positions.
2. Ensure that organizational information and systems are protected during and after personnel actions such as terminations and transfers.
3. Employ formal sanctions for personnel failing to comply with organizational security policies and procedures.

## 10.17 Risk Assessment (RA)

Organizations are dependent upon information technology and associated systems to successfully carry out their missions. While the increasing number of information technology products used in various organizations and industries can be beneficial, in some instances they may also introduce serious threats that can adversely affect an organization’s systems by exploiting both known and unknown vulnerabilities.

The exploitation of vulnerabilities in organizational systems can compromise the confidentiality, integrity, or availability of the information being processed, stored, or transmitted by those systems.

### Importance of Risk Assessment

Performing a risk assessment is one of four components of risk management as described in...# NIST SP 800-39

## Risk Assessments

Risk assessments identify and prioritize risks to organizational operations, assets, individuals, other organizations, and the Nation that may result from the operation of a system. Risk assessments, which can be conducted at all three tiers in the risk management hierarchy, inform decision makers and support risk responses by identifying:

1. Relevant threats to organizations or threats directed through organizations against other organizations.
2. Vulnerabilities both internal and external to organizations.
3. Impact (i.e., harm) to organizations that may occur given the potential for threats exploiting vulnerabilities.
4. The likelihood that harm will occur.

For more information on risk assessments, see NIST SP 800-30.

### Examples of Risk Assessment Controls

- Security categorization
- Risk assessment
- Vulnerability scanning
- Technical surveillance countermeasures survey

Organizations should periodically assess the risk to organizational operations (e.g., mission, functions, image, reputation), organizational assets, and individuals, which may result from the operation of organizational systems and the associated processing, storage, or transmission of organizational information.

## 10.18 System and Services Acquisition (SA)

As with other aspects of information processing systems, security is most effective and efficient if planned and managed throughout a system's life cycle, from initial planning to design, implementation, operation, and disposal. Many security-relevant events and analyses occur during a system's life, which begins with the organization acquiring the necessary tools and services.

The effective integration of security requirements into enterprise architecture also helps to ensure that important security considerations are addressed early in the Software Development Life Cycle (SDLC) and that those considerations are directly related to the organizational mission/business processes.

### Security Planning

System Security Plans (SSPs) can be developed for a system at any point in the life cycle. However, to minimize costs and prevent the disruption of ongoing operations, the recommended approach is to incorporate the plan at the beginning of the system’s life cycle. It is significantly more expensive to add security features to a system than it is to include them from the very beginning. It is important to ensure that security requirements keep pace with changes to the computing environment, technology, and personnel.

### Examples of System and Service Acquisition Controls

- Allocation of resources
- Acquisition process
- System documentation
- Supply chain protection
- Trustworthiness
- Criticality analysis
- Developer-provided training
- Component authenticity
- Developer screening

Organizations should:

1. Allocate sufficient resources to adequately protect organizational systems.
2. Employ SDLC processes that incorporate information security considerations.
3. Employ software usage and installation restrictions.
4. Ensure that third-party providers employ appropriate security measures.# Security Measures for Information Protection

## 10.19 System and Communications Protection (SC)

System and communications protection controls provide an array of safeguards for the system. Some of the controls in this family address the confidentiality and integrity of information at rest and in transit. The protection of confidentiality and integrity can be provided by these controls through physical or logical means.

For example, an organization can provide physical protection by segregating certain functions to separate servers, each having its own set of IP addresses. Organizations can better safeguard their information by separating user functionality and system management functionality. Providing this type of protection prevents the presentation of system management-related functionality on an interface for non-privileged users.

System and communications protection also establishes boundaries that restrict access to publicly-accessible information within a system. Using boundary protections, an organization can monitor and control communications at external boundaries as well as key internal boundaries within the system.

### Examples of System and Communication Protection Controls

- Application partitioning
- Denial of service protection
- Boundary protection
- Trusted path
- Mobile code
- Session authenticity
- Thin nodes
- Honeypots
- Transmission confidentiality and integrity
- Operations security
- Protection of information at rest and in transit
- Usage restrictions

Organizations:
1. Monitor, control, and protect organizational communications (i.e., information transmitted or received by organizational systems) at the external boundaries and key internal boundaries of the systems.
2. Employ architectural designs, software development techniques, and systems engineering principles that promote effective information security within organizational systems.

## 10.20 System and Information Integrity (SI)

Integrity is defined as guarding against improper information modification or destruction, and includes ensuring information non-repudiation and authenticity. It is the assertion that data can only be accessed or modified by the authorized personnel. System and information integrity provides assurance that the information being accessed has not been meddled with or damaged by an error in the system.

### Examples of System and Information Integrity Controls

- Flaw remediation
- Malicious code protection
- Security function verification
- Information input validation
- Error handling
- Non-persistence
- Memory protection

Organizations:
1. Identify, report, and correct information and system flaws in a timely manner.
2. Provide protection from malicious code at appropriate locations within organizational systems.
3. Monitor system security alerts and advisories and respond appropriately.