Abstract
An organization often has mission and business-based needs to exchange (share) information with one
or more other internal or external organizations via various information exchange channels. However, it
is recognized that the information being exchanged also requires the same or similar level of protection
as it moves from one organization to another (protection commensurate with risk).
This publication focuses on managing the protection of the information being exchanged or accessed
before, during, and after the exchange and provides guidance on identifying information exchanges,
considerations for protecting exchanged information, and the agreement(s) needed to help manage the
risk associated with exchanging information. This publication does not provide implementation guidance
on any particular type of technology-based connection, information access, or exchange method.
Organizations are expected to tailor the guidance to meet specific organizational needs and
requirements regarding the information exchange.
Executive Summary
Managing the Security of Information Exchanges provides guidance for planning, establishing,
maintaining, and discontinuing information exchange and access between systems that are owned and
operated by different organizations (internal or external) or that cross authorization boundaries. The
guidance is consistent with the requirements specified in the Office of Management and Budget (OMB)
Circular A-130 for the secure management of information exchanges.
This guidance defines the scope of information exchange, describes the benefits of the secure
management of information exchange, identifies types of information exchanges, discusses potential
security risks associated with information exchange, and discusses several types of agreements that may
be applied by organizations with a mission or business need to exchange information.
An approach for securely managing information exchange between systems and organizations is
presented. The following four phases of information exchange management are addressed:
1. Planning the information exchange: The participating organizations perform preliminary
activities; examine all relevant technical, security, and administrative issues; and develop an
appropriate agreement to govern the management and use of the information and how it is to
be exchanged (e.g., via a dedicated circuit or virtual private network, database sharing, cloud- or
web-based services, or simple file exchange).
2. Establishing the information exchange: The organizations develop and execute a plan for
establishing the information exchange, including implementing or configuring appropriate
security controls and developing and signing appropriate agreements.
3. Maintaining the exchange and associated agreements: The organizations actively maintain the
security of the information exchange after it is established and ensure that the terms of the
associated agreements are met and remain relevant, including reviewing and renewing the
agreements at an agreed-upon frequency.
4. Discontinuing the information exchange: Information exchange may be temporary, or at some
point, the organizations may need to discontinue the information exchange. Whether the
exchange was temporary or long-term, the conclusion of an information exchange is conducted
in a manner that avoids disrupting any other party's system. In response to an incident or other
emergency, however, the organizations may decide to discontinue the information exchange
immediately.
This publication provides recommended steps for completing each phase with an emphasis on the
security measures necessary to protect the shared data.
Also included is information for selecting and developing appropriate information exchange agreements
and agreement templates. Agreements specify the responsibilities of participating organizations and the
technical and security requirements for the information exchange.
1 Introduction
An organization often has mission- and business-based needs to share or exchange information with
other internal or external organizations via various information exchange methods. However, it is
recognized that the information being exchanged also requires the same or similar level of protection as
it moves from one organization to another (protection commensurate with risk).
This publication focuses on managing the protection of the information being exchanged or accessed
before, during, and after the exchange and provides guidance on identifying information exchanges,
considerations for protecting exchanged information, and the agreement(s) needed to help manage the
risk associated with exchanging information. This publication does not provide implementation guidance
on any particular type of technology-based connection, information access, or exchange method.
Organizations are expected to tailor the guidance to meet specific organizational needs and
requirements regarding the information exchange.
1.1 Purpose and Applicability
This publication provides guidance for managing (i.e., planning, establishing, maintaining, and
discontinuing) the security of information exchanges between systems that are owned and operated by
different organizations or are within the same organization but with different authorization boundaries,
including organizations within a single federal agency. Organizations manage the security of the
information being exchanged by applying security controls and entering into agreements designed to
manage risk and protect the information being exchanged at the same or similar level.
This publication is published by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) as
recommended guidance for federal agencies. It also may be used by non-federal organizations.
Federal agencies rely on applicable laws, regulations, and policies for exchanging information between
systems that are used to store, process, and disseminate classified data.
1.2 Target Audience
This publication is intended for the Senior Accountable Official for Risk Management/Risk Executive
(function), authorizing officials, system owners, information owners, program managers, security
officers, system architects, system administrators, and network administrators who are responsible for
planning, approving, establishing, maintaining, or discontinuing information exchanges and access
between systems. Specific information exchange technologies are not addressed (i.e., the guidance is
technology-neutral and can be applied to any type of information exchange between any type of
organization).
1.3 Organization of this Publication
This publication is organized into three sections and three appendices. Section 1 introduces the
document. Section 2 discusses the document's purpose and benefits, as well as the types and methods
of information exchange. Section 3 describes four phases for managing the security of information
exchanges and provides a matrix to help organizations determine the types of agreements needed to
manage the security of the information exchange.
The References section provides references information. Appendix A provides glossary information.
Appendix B provides acronym and abbreviation translations. Appendix C provides examples of some
agreement types. 
2 The Fundamentals
Information exchange includes access to or the transfer of data outside of authorization boundaries in
order to accomplish a mission or business function. When information is accessed or passed across the
authorization boundary from one system to another, one or more agreements are used to specify the
responsibilities of each organization, the types and impact level of information to be accessed or
exchanged, how the exchanged information is to be used, and how the information is to be protected
when it is processed, stored, or transmitted on both ends of the exchange. The type of agreement(s)
selected and the level of effort required to develop and maintain the agreement are based on factors
including, but not limited to, the impact level of the information being exchanged, the relationship
between the organizations exchanging information (e.g., internal organization to internal organization,
government to government, government to business, business to business, government or business to
service provider, government or business to individual), the resiliency requirements of the information
exchange, and the level of access to the system and information by users of the other systems and
organizations.
Organizations choose to exchange information for a variety of reasons, depending on organizational
needs. For example, organizations may exchange information to:
• Share data and information among authorized users
• Provide customized levels of access to data
• Collaborate on joint projects
• Provide full, part-time, intermittent, permanent, or temporary communications
• Reduce data collection efforts
• Provide online training
• Provide secure storage for critical data and backup files
Significant benefits can be realized through information exchange, such as reduced operating costs,
greater functionality, improved efficiency, centralized access to data, and the reduction of duplicative
datasets. Information exchange between systems may also strengthen ties among participating
organizations by promoting communication and cooperation.
Despite the advantages, information exchange exposes the participating organizations to risk. If the
information exchange is not properly planned and managed, a failure to protect the information from a
loss of confidentiality, integrity, or availability could compromise the information and associated
systems. Similarly, if one of the systems is compromised, the exchanged information could be
compromised, or an interconnection used to exchange information could be leveraged as a conduit to
compromise the other system and information. The risk is underscored because, in most cases, each
participating organization has little or no control over the operation and management of the other 
organization's system. Additionally, each participating organization may have different risk tolerances
associated with the information exchange and dependencies to facilitate and rely on the exchange.
Therefore, it is critical that the participating organizations learn as much as possible about the risks
associated with the information exchange and what security controls can be implemented to mitigate
those risks. Depending on the type of information exchange and the impact level of the information
being exchanged, it may also be critical that the organizations establish and formally document one or
more agreements regarding the management and use of the exchanged information and the operation
of any interconnection used to exchange the information. Senior managers from each organization are
responsible for reviewing, approving, and signing the agreement (e.g., Risk Executive (function) [RE(f)],
Chief Information Officer [CIO], Chief Information Security Officer [CISO], Authorizing Official [AO]).
2.1 Information Exchange
Information exchange occurs via communications technology usually provided by an internet service
provider (ISP) or via a system interconnection (physical or virtual), which may itself employ the services
of an ISP or telecommunications vendor. Methods to exchange information and for which some type of
information exchange agreement may be warranted include but are not limited to direct exchange
(including access) across a system interconnection, electronic or digital file transfers, file-sharing
services, database access/sharing or exchanges of database transaction information, exchange of
information via portable storage device (which does not use an ISP or system interconnection), and
email exchange.
Excluded from information exchanges and information exchange agreements are public services (e.g.,
time service), users accessing publicly available websites via a web browser, connections with an ISP,
and organizational users logging into the organizational network via an organization-approved endpoint.
Organizations and users accessing a publicly available service or website are not be included in the
scope of this document, as public information may not need safeguards on protection, use, or further
distribution. However, protected information distributed via a website may be in scope if users are
expected to abide by any terms and conditions prior to being given access to the information.
Furthermore, the connection between an organization and an ISP is not used to exchange information
between the organization and the ISP. Rather, the ISP connection provides a communications channel
that allows the organization to exchange information with other organizations.
The types of information to be exchanged, the impact levels of the information being exchanged, and
how the information is to be used by the other organization are agreed upon by participating
organizations to manage risk and address information security requirements for information exchanges
regardless of the particular method of exchange. Such knowledge helps the participating organizations
determine: 
• the appropriate level of information protection needed for transmission and when the
information is processed or stored at the other organization, and
• helps organizations determine the types of agreements, if any, that are needed for the
exchange.
The organizations consider agreement types such as interconnection security agreements,
interconnection exchange agreements, non-disclosure agreements, access agreements, and/or
acceptable use agreements, as described in Section 3.1.5.
2.1.1 System Interconnections
A system interconnection is defined as a direct connection between two or more systems in different
authorization boundaries for the purpose of exchanging information and/or allowing access to
information, information services, and resources. An interconnection used for information exchange has
at least three basic components: two (or more) endpoints and the mechanism by which the data flows
(i.e., the "pipe" through which information is exchanged). The interconnection can be made from one
location to another location or from one location to several locations. In this publication, it is assumed
that the systems being interconnected are in different authorization boundaries, are owned and
operated by different organizations, or are separately managed entities within the same organization.
That is, management of the security of information exchanges is needed not only when information is
exchanged between different organizations, but also when it is exchanged across authorization
boundaries within a given organization.
The decision to exchange information via a system interconnection is based on an assessment of the
associated risks. [SP 800-30], Guide for Conducting Risk Assessments, provides guidance on conducting
risk assessments and addresses the determination of threats, vulnerabilities, the likelihood of
occurrence, and the impact of occurrence on the mission. Organizations participating in the information
exchange conduct risk assessments to determine the risks of exchanging information and
interconnecting systems from each organization's perspective.
A system interconnection is made via a dedicated or on-demand circuit (e.g., leased lines) or via a virtual
connection using a Virtual Private Network (VPN) solution (e.g., Internet Protocol Security [IPsec],
Secure Sockets Layer Virtual Private Network [SSLVPN], Layer Two Tunneling Protocol [L2TP]).
The dedicated or on-demand circuit or the VPN is the "pipe" that connects the systems. Employment of
a dedicated circuit may be more expensive, but it provides greater security assurance for the
information exchange because the circuit may only be breached through a direct physical intrusion.
The less expensive alternative is to connect systems over a public network (e.g., the internet) using a
VPN. A VPN is a network that enables two or more parties to communicate securely across a public
network by creating a private connection, or "tunnel," between endpoints. Information transmitted via
VPN over a public network can be intercepted by unauthorized parties. However, the use of
authentication and encryption helps ensure the confidentiality and integrity of the information 
exchange.
System interconnections can operate at a network level or an application level:
• Network Interconnection – A physical or virtual communications link between two or more
networks operated by different organizations or operated within the same organization but
within different authorization boundaries.
• Application Interconnection – A logical communications link between two or more
applications operated by different organizations or within the same organization but within
different authorization boundaries used to exchange information or provide information
services (e.g., authentication, logging). Application interconnections include file-sharing
services or applications and information exchange feeds that occur at the session,
presentation, or application layer.
System interconnections can include permanent connections or temporary connections established for a
specific period of time (or function):
• Permanent (always on) Connection – A permanent connection is a perpetual communication
channel. Permanent connections are most often made via a dedicated circuit.
• Scheduled Data Transfer – A scheduled data transfer is a connection used to transfer data
on a regular, recurring basis. For example, every Friday evening, weekly payroll information
is shared between an organization and that organization's payroll service provider.
Scheduled data transfers may use a dedicated circuit or virtual connection.
• Intermittent Ad hoc Connection – An intermittent, ad hoc connection is a needs-based
connection initiated for a specific time or purpose after which the connection is terminated.
Intermittent connections are most often made via virtual connection.
To address information security requirements for system interconnections, an interconnection security
agreement (ISA) that specifies the security requirements expected for the impact level of the
information being exchanged for all participating systems is recommended. ISAs are often coupled with
Memoranda of Understanding/Agreement (MOU/A). Examples of ISA and MOU/A templates are
provided in Appendix C. Other types of agreements may also be required and applied (e.g., contracts,
non-disclosure agreements [NDA], access agreements, and acceptable use agreements). See Section
3.1.5 for more information on agreements.
The diagram below (Figure 1) illustrates two ways in which systems can be interconnected, as described
in this section. In the figure, System A is connected to System B via a dedicated circuit. System A is
connected to System C via a VPN tunnel.
2.1.2 Methods of Information Exchange
Information can be exchanged using various methods via a system interconnection, an ISP, or both.
Common methods of information exchange include but are not limited to electronic or digital file
transfers, information exchange via portable storage device, information exchange via email, database
sharing or exchanges of database transaction information, and web- or cloud-based services.
• Electronic/Digital File Transfers – Information can be exchanged via an electronic or digital
file transfer, the transmission of a file (information) between two systems via a file transfer
(communications) protocol. Organizations consider the risk associated with the use of
different file transfer protocols; file transfer protocols include file transfer protocol secure
(FTPS), Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure (HTTPS), and Secure Copy Protocol (SCP).
• Email – Organizations often share information via email as file attachments. Organizations
consider the impact levels and implemented security controls for participating
organizations' email infrastructure to determine if the measures implemented to protect
the information being exchanged are adequate (e.g., email infrastructure protected at a
moderate-impact level is insufficient to protect high-impact information).
• Portable Storage Device – In some cases, information may have to be exchanged using a
portable storage device, such as removable discs (e.g., digital video discs (DVDs)) or
Universal Serial Bus (USB)/thumb drives. Organizations consider the impact level of the
information being transferred as well as the impact level of the system into which the
information is to be transferred to determine if measures implemented to protect the
information being exchanged are adequate (e.g., chain of custody of the portable storage
device).
• Database sharing or exchanges of database transaction information, including access to
information by users from another organization. Organizations consider the viability of
providing access to information instead of transferring it to reduce the instance of
duplicative datasets and the risk of the loss of confidentiality and integrity of the
information.
• File sharing services – File sharing services include but are not limited to information sharing
and access to information via web-based file sharing or storage, such as Drop Box, Google 
Drive, MS Teams, or MS One Drive. Organizations consider the risk associated with using a
web-based file sharing or storage system that may not offer the information owners insight
into location of where servers are located, or physical and logical access to the facility,
servers, and information.
2.2 Information Exchange: Accessing or Transferring the Information
Information may be exchanged by accessing or transferring the information using one or more of the
methods described in Section 2.1.2.
When information is exchanged via transfer, the information is duplicated in additional physical
locations. Information transfer may lead to duplicative datasets, outdated information, or an increased
risk of unauthorized disclosure or modification. However, the transfer of information may be indicated
to support the use of the same information in a different mission or business process, different software
application, or when it is otherwise not feasible to exchange information via system access.
Organizations are advised to limit or restrict exchanged information to only the specific data needed to
support the stated mission/business case rather than transferring the entire dataset. Participating
organizations consider the impact of a loss of the confidentiality and integrity of the information being
transferred as well as the need to protect the information commensurate with the agreed-upon impact
level, regardless of its physical location.
When information is exchanged via system access, the information itself is not transferred but rather is
accessed by users from participating organizations. Exchanging information via system access reduces
the instances of duplicative datasets and the risk of loss of confidentiality and integrity of the
information. As with any form of system access, the extent to which a user may access information
resources is dependent on the organizational mission and the adverse impact of a loss of confidentiality,
integrity, and availability of the information. Accordingly, organizations may establish a limited
exchange, whereby users are restricted to a single application, file, or file location with specific policies
in place to govern access (e.g., access limited to read-only). Other organizations may establish more
flexible exchanges, enabling users to access multiple applications, files, or databases. Still other
organizations may establish exchanges that permit full transparency and access to the system and
information.
3 Information Exchange Security Management
Risk-based management of information exchanges requires organizational-level governance to protect
the information being exchanged with a level of effort that is commensurate with risk. Prior to any
actual information exchange, the organization develops, documents, and disseminates policies and
procedures governing information exchange. Decisions regarding the level of effort given to managing
and protecting exchanged information—including the formality and rigor of planning, implementation,
and the identification of formal agreement types needed—are based on organizational policy and
procedures. Information exchange policies and procedures and decisions about how to manage and
protect exchanged information are based on the impact of loss of the confidentiality, integrity, and
availability of the information as determined by risk assessment and in accordance with organizational
risk tolerance.
At a minimum, information exchange policy and procedures establish the types of information that can
be shared without formal planning and agreements; the types of information that require tracking,
formal planning, and agreements; and a process for determining the level of effort needed for
exchanging types of information not specified in policy. For example, organizational policy might specify
that exchanging low impact information via email does not require formal planning or a formal
agreement, while exchanging moderate-impact information via a file sharing service does require some
formal planning and one or more formal agreements.
The remainder of this section describes four phases of information exchange management. Based on the
level of effort needed to manage and protect exchanged information commensurate with risk and in
accordance with organizational policies and procedures, organizations have the flexibility to determine
the formality and rigor with which to apply the four phases and select the most appropriate agreements.
The four phases of information exchange management are described below and depicted in Figure 2:
1. Planning the information exchange: The participating organizations conduct preliminary
activities; examine all relevant technical, security, and administrative issues; and develop and
sign appropriate agreements governing the management and use of the information and how it
is to be exchanged (e.g., via an interconnection, file transfer, database sharing, web-based
services, or a simple file exchange via email).
2. Establishing the information exchange: The organizations develop and execute a plan for
establishing the information exchange, including implementing or configuring appropriate
security controls and activating the exchange in accordance with organizational policies,
procedures, and any signed agreements.
3. Maintaining the exchange and associated agreements: The organizations actively maintain the
security of the information exchange after it is established and ensure that the terms of
associated agreements are met and remain relevant.
4. Discontinuing the information exchange: At some point, the organizations may need to
discontinue the information exchange. The discontinuance of an information exchange is
conducted in a manner that avoids disrupting organizational systems. In response to an incident
or other emergency, however, the organizations may decide to discontinue the information
exchange immediately.
3.1. Planning an Information Exchange
The process of exchanging information between two or more systems begins with a planning phase in which the participating organizations
perform preliminary activities and examine the relevant technical, security, and administrative issues, as shown in Figure 3. The purpose of the
planning phase is to ensure that the information exchange operates as efficiently and securely as possible. This section discusses recommended
steps for planning a system information exchange. The formality, structure, and rigor of the planning phase steps depend on the type of
exchange, the impact level of the information to be exchanged, the relationship of the organizations involved in the exchange, and
organizational policies and procedures for information exchange.
3.1.1 Step 1: Establish a Joint Planning Team
Each organization is responsible for ensuring the security of its respective systems and information and
for applying a well-coordinated approach to the information exchange, including regular
communications between the organizations throughout the phases of the exchange. Therefore, the
organizations consider establishing a joint planning team composed of representatives from
participating organizations that may include appropriate managerial and technical staff, mission and
business owners, system owners, information owners, system security officers, system administrators,
network administrators, and system security architects. The joint planning team could be part of an
existing working group or be created specifically for the planned information exchange. Regardless of
how the team is formed, the commitment and support of the system and information owners and other
senior managers are important. The team is responsible for coordinating all aspects of the planning
process and ensuring that the process has clear direction, well-defined responsibilities, and sufficient
resources. The planning team may also remain active beyond the planning phase to serve as a forum for
future discussions about issues involving the information exchange.
In addition, members of the planning team coordinate with colleagues responsible for information
technology (IT) capital planning, configuration management, and other activities that may be associated
with the information exchange or related technology. In many cases, the information exchange is in part
or in whole a component of each organization's network. By coordinating the planning of the
information exchange with associated stakeholders, the organizations can reduce security risk, reduce
redundancy, and promote efficiency. 
3.1.2 Step 2: Define the Business Case
The organizations work together to define the purpose of the information exchange, determine how the
information exchange will support mission and business requirements, and identify potential costs and
risks. Defining the business case establishes the basis of the information exchange and facilitates the
planning process. Factors to consider are likely costs (e.g., staffing, equipment, and facilities), expected
benefits (e.g., improved efficiency and centralized access to data), and potential risks (e.g., security,
technical, privacy, legal, financial, etc.).
Note that there may be privacy statutes, regulations, or policies that place restrictions on the data to be
exchanged. Examples of data that might be restricted include personally identifiable information such as
names and social security numbers or confidential business information such as contractor bid rates and
trade secrets. Each organization consults with its Privacy Officer and/or Legal Counsel to determine
whether the information to be exchanged may be shared, transferred, or accessed by the other
organizations participating in the information exchange.
3.1.3 Step 3: Apply the NIST Risk Management Framework
Before exchanging information, each organization ensures that it has applied the Risk Management
Framework (RMF) process to affected systems, as described in [SP 800-37], Risk Management
Framework for Information Systems and Organizations: A System Lifecycle Approach for Security and
Privacy.
3.1.4 Step 4: Identify Specific Protection Requirements
The joint planning team identifies and examines relevant technical, security, and administrative issues
surrounding the proposed information exchange. The results are used to develop the appropriate
agreements needed to support and manage the information exchange and protect the information. The
results may also be used to develop an implementation plan for establishing the information exchange.
Note that changes made to existing systems in support of the information exchange, especially changes
involving the addition of system components (i.e., hardware, software, or firmware) or changes to
infrastructure, may necessitate revisiting one or more steps and tasks from the RMF.
The joint planning team considers the following issues:
• Applicable laws, executive orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards, and guidelines:
Participating organizations may be subject to security and privacy requirements that affect
the information exchange. The participants in the information exchange are responsible for
ensuring that any applicable laws, executive orders, directives, regulations, policies,
standards, and guidelines are addressed.
• Risk Assessment: Participants in the information exchange may conduct a risk assessment to
determine the impacts of a loss of confidentiality, integrity, and availability of the data to be
exchanged to help ensure the appropriate level of protection and the availability of
resources needed. The originating organization stipulates the protection requirements for
the information in the agreements. If a risk assessment has already been conducted, the
planning team considers the existing results and may need to update the results.
• Information Security Risk Considerations:
- Minimize the data exchanged to reduce the risk of a loss of confidentiality and integrity
outside of the authorization boundary.
- Consider increased risk if data are to be exchanged from a High Value Asset (HVA).
7
- Consider the availability and resiliency requirements for the information exchange (also
see Dependencies below).
- Consider whether the interconnections that participating organizations' systems have with
other systems and organizations could increase the risk of loss of confidentiality, integrity,
and availability of exchanged information and organizational systems.
• Impact Level: Identify the impact of a loss of the information to be exchanged with respect
to each of the three security objectives individually (i.e., confidentiality, integrity, and
availability). Decisions about whether and how to share information may be different if the
impact of a loss of availability is high but the impact of a loss of confidentiality is low versus
the impact of a loss being moderate for integrity and low for availability. Identifying and
agreeing to the information impact level is critical for determining the protection
requirements for the exchanged information. See [SP 800-60], Guide for Mapping Types of
Information and Information Systems to Security Categories; [FIPS 199], Standards for
Security Categorization of Federal Information and Information Systems; and the Controlled
Unclassified Information [(CUI) Registry] managed by the National Archives and Records
Administration (NARA) for further guidance on identifying impact levels. Also see [SP 800-
53] control RA-2.
• Method of the information exchange: Define the method of information exchange, which
may range from the ad hoc emailing of files (limited data exchange) to a full system
interconnection (exchange of information across a dedicated circuit or VPN).
• Impact on Existing Infrastructure and Operations: Determine whether the network
infrastructure and system architecture currently used by participating organizations are
sufficient to support the information exchange or whether additional infrastructure
components are required (e.g., communication lines, routers, switches). If additional
components are required, determine the potential impact that installing and using the
components might have on the existing infrastructure, if any. In addition, determine the
potential impacts that the information exchange could have on current operations (e.g.,
increases in data traffic, new training requirements, and additional demands on system
administration, security, and maintenance).
• Dependencies: Determine if one or more of the systems participating in the information
exchange is/are dependent on the information to be exchanged or on the system
interconnection itself for continued operation. If such dependencies exist, [SP 800-53]
controls that support the availability objective for the system or information may warrant
special attention (e.g., contingency planning, system or interconnection redundancies, or
other resilience needs).
• Specific Hardware Requirements: Identify the hardware needed to support the information
exchange (e.g., routers, firewalls, switches, servers, or workstations). Determine whether
existing hardware is sufficient or whether additional components are required, especially if 
future growth is anticipated. If new hardware is required, select products that are
interoperable with existing hardware.
• Specific Software Requirements: Identify software needed to support the information
exchange, including software for information exchange management and file sharing
services, and on what hardware the software is to be installed (e.g., firewalls, servers,
workstations, and laptops). Determine whether existing software is sufficient or whether
additional software is required. If new software is required, select products that are
interoperable with existing software.
• User Community: Define the community of users requiring access to the exchanged
information. Determine whether users are required to have specific employment status or
nationality requirements as well as what level of background checks and/or security
clearances are required.Devise an approach for compiling and managing the profiles of
users requiring access to the exchanged information, including user identification and any
other relevant information. Participating organizations use the user information to develop
and maintain an approved access list or database of users with access to the exchanged
information. Also see [SP 800-53] controls AC-2, Account Management; AC-3, Access
Enforcement; IA-2, Identification and Authentication (Organizational Users); and IA-8,
Identification and Authentication (Non-Organizational Users).
• Services and Applications: Identify any information services to be provided by each
organization as part of the information exchange as well as the applications associated with
those services, if appropriate. Examples of services may include email, secure file sharing
services, authentication services, and general computational services.
• Roles and Responsibilities: Identify the personnel responsible for establishing, maintaining,
or managing the information exchange and specific responsibilities with respect to the
information exchange. Affected personnel may include program managers, system owners,
information owners, system and/or database administrators, and system security officers.
Choose personnel who have appropriate subject matter expertise. Specific information on
security roles and responsibilities is available in [SP 800-37].
• Scheduling: Develop a schedule for activities involved in planning, establishing, and
maintaining the information exchange. Also, determine the schedule and conditions for
terminating or reauthorizing the exchange. For example, all parties might agree to annually
review agreements associated with the exchange to determine if the exchange is still
needed and that the protection requirements remain sufficient.
• Costs and Budgeting: Identify the expected costs required to plan, establish, and maintain
the interconnection. Identify all associated costs, including labor, hardware, software,
communications lines, applications, facilities, physical security, training, and testing. Also,
identify costs for authorizing the information exchange after it is established, if appropriate.
Develop a comprehensive budget and determine how costs will be apportioned between
the parties, if required.
• Data Element Naming: If the information exchange involves databases, determine whether
the data element naming schemes used by participating organizations are compatible or
whether it is necessary to normalize databases so that the organizations can use the
exchanged information. In addition, determine how to identify and resolve potential data
element naming conflicts.
• Information Ownership: Determine whether ownership of exchanged information is
transferred from the transmitting organization to the receiving organization or whether the
transmitting organization retains ownership and the receiver is a custodian. As part of this
effort, determine how exchanged information is stored, whether the information may be re-used or transferred to a third organization or system, and how information is destroyed
when no longer needed.
• Security Controls: Identify protection requirements to be implemented as controls to protect
the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of the exchanged information and the systems
processing, storing, or transmitting the information. Protection requirements are based on
the impact of the potential loss of the confidentiality, integrity, or availability of the
information and associated systems, organizational risk tolerance, and risk assessment
results. If appropriate, organizations may begin with the relevant baseline set of controls, as
identified in [SP 800-53B]. Note that many of the issues addressed in this section (Section
3.1.4) are resolved by implementing controls in the baseline control sets but are included in
this section to provide specifics on implementation for information exchange. Relevant [SP
800-53] controls are specified as appropriate.
- Separation of Duties: Determine how the management or execution of duties associated
with the information exchange is to be divided between the participating organizations
and between the users of the information to be exchanged. Examples of duties that might
be separated include auditing, managing user profiles, managing configurations, and
maintaining equipment. Separation of duties reduces the risk that a single individual could
cause harm to the exchanged information and the systems processing, storing, or
transmitting the information, either accidentally or deliberately. See control AC-5,
Separation of Duties, in [SP 800-53].
- Incident Reporting and Response: Establish procedures to report and respond to
anomalous and suspicious activity or actual incidents related to the information exchange
that are detected by technology or staff in participating organizations. Incident reporting
procedures are consistent with applicable laws, executive orders, directives, regulations,
policies, standards, and guidelines. Determine when and how to notify each other about
suspicious activity or security incidents that could affect the information exchange.
Identify the types of incidents that require a report and the information to be included in
the report, such as the cause of the incident, affected information or applications, and
actual or potential impact. In addition, identify the types of incidents that require a
coordinated response and determine how to coordinate response activities. It might be
appropriate to develop a joint incident response plan for this purpose. For more
information, reference the Incident Response (IR) family of controls in [SP 800-53] and the
[US-Cert Federal Incident Notification Guidelines]. SPs [800-61], [800-83], and [800-86]
provide detailed information on incident response.
- Contingency Planning: It may be necessary to have a contingency plan to respond to and
recover from disasters or disruptive contingencies that could affect the information
exchange, especially if the information exchange is moderate- or high-impact for
availability. Organizations determine how to notify each other of such contingencies, the
extent to which the organizations will assist each other, and the terms under which
assistance will be provided. Identify emergency points of contact (POC). Determine
whether to incorporate redundancy into components that support the information
exchange, including redundant interconnection points, and how to retrieve backed up
information. Coordinate disaster response training, testing, and exercises. Additional
information on the Contingency Planning (CP) family of controls can be found in [SP 800-
53]. [SP 800-34] provides detailed information on developing contingency plans.
- Data Backup: Determine backup and storage requirements for exchanged information. If
backups are required, identify the types of information that require backup, the frequency
of backups (e.g., daily, weekly, or monthly), and which organization is responsible for the
backups. Also, determine how to perform backups and how to link backups to contingency
plan procedures. See controls in the Contingency Planning (CP) family (e.g., CP-6,
Alternate Site Storage, and CP-9, Information System Backup) in [SP 800-53] for more
specific guidance.
- Configuration Management: Determine how to coordinate the planning, design, and
implementation of changes to the configuration baseline that could affect the security and
functionality of the information exchange, such as upgrading hardware or software,
changing configuration settings, or adding services. Establish a forum with relevant staff
from each organization to review the proposed changes that may affect the information
exchange. Coordinating configuration management activities reduces the potential for
implementing changes that could introduce vulnerabilities or otherwise impact the
confidentiality, integrity, or availability of the exchanged information or the systems
processing, storing, or transmitting the information. Information on the Configuration
Management (CM) family of controls is available in [SP 800-53]. [SP 800-128], Guide for
Security-Focused Configuration Management of Information Systems, provides detailed
information on configuration management.
- Rules of Behavior: Develop rules of behavior that clearly delineate the responsibilities and
expected behavior of personnel authorized to access the exchanged information and the
systems processing, storing, or transmitting the information. Document the rules in
writing and state the consequences of inconsistent behavior or noncompliance. Cover the
documented rules of behavior in a security training and awareness program. See [SP 800-
53] control PL-4, Rules of Behavior.
- Training and Awareness: Define training and awareness requirements for personnel
authorized to access the exchanged information and the systems processing, storing, or
transmitting the information. The information exchange training and awareness
requirements may be incorporated into existing training and awareness activities. Training
and awareness requirements may include the frequency and scheduling of training and
the assignment of responsibility for conducting training and awareness activities. Design
training to ensure that personnel are familiar with the relevant policies, procedures, and
rules of behavior associated with the exchanged information and the systems that
process, store, or transmit the information. Require users to sign an acknowledgment
form indicating an understanding of security responsibilities with regard to the
information exchange, if appropriate. If shared applications are used, ensure that users
know how to use them properly. Additional information on the Awareness and Training
(AT) family of controls is available in [SP 800-53]. [SP 800-50] provides detailed
information on building an information security awareness and training program. [SP 800-
181] provides detailed information on a cybersecurity workforce framework. Additional
information on information security education is available at the NIST National Initiative
for Cybersecurity Education (NICE) website.
3.1.5 Step 5: Document Appropriate Agreements8
The joint planning team determines and documents the agreements needed to govern the exchanged
information; the systems processing, storing, or transmitting the information; the roles and
responsibilities of the affected organizations and users; the terms under which the organizations will
abide by the agreement based on the team's review of relevant technical, security, and administrative
issues (as described in Section 3.1.4); and other appropriate requirements. More than one type of
agreement may be needed, such as an interconnection security agreement coupled with a non-disclosure agreement. Organizations are advised to seek legal advice regarding the precedence and
authority of agreements.
The Potential Agreements Matrix (Table 1) reflects agreements that may be needed based on the type
or method of information exchange (rows) and the impact of a loss of that information (columns). The
matrix is not intended to be prescriptive or limit the risk-based agreement choices by organizations but
rather provides initial guidance to assist organizations in determining the most appropriate agreements.
Additional criteria may also impact the types of agreements needed, including relevant technical,
security, and administrative issues, as described in Section 3.1.4.
Because the agreements themselves may contain information that is moderate impact or higher,
agreements are processed, stored, and transmitted in accordance with impact level to protect against
theft, damage, or destruction. Examples of some agreement templates are provided in Appendix C.
3.1.5.1 Interconnection Security Agreement
An interconnection security agreement (ISA) is a document that specifies the technical and security
requirements for establishing, operating, and maintaining an interconnection between two or more
systems. The ISA also supports a Memoranda of Understanding/Agreement (MOU/A) between the
organizations. Specifically, the ISA documents the requirements for connecting the systems; describes
the protection requirements and controls necessary to protect exchanged information and the systems
processing, storing, or transmitting the information; usually includes a topological drawing of the
interconnection; and provides a signature line for participating organizations. An ISA is indicated when
the information exchange occurs via an interconnection, as described in Section 2.1.1. Note that the
organization may already have an interconnection and corresponding ISA with another organization
over which information exchanges occur between multiple systems and in support of multiple mission
requirements. In such situations, the information owner determines if the security protections and
processes specified in the existing ISA reduce risk to a level acceptable for the information to be
exchanged. If the protections and processes are acceptable, additional agreements may still be required
(see Table 1). If not, the ISA may be modified or a separate interconnection may be needed. An ISA
template is provided in Appendix C.
3.1.5.2 Memoranda of Understanding (MOU) and/or Agreement (MOA)
A MOU/A is often applied to information exchanges in conjunction with an ISA. In general, an MOU is a
statement of intent between the participating organizations to work together and often states goals,
objectives, or the purpose for the partnership; details the terms of and conditions for the agreement; 
and outlines the operations needed to achieve the goals or purpose. The MOA is most often used to
address the financial responsibilities and obligations between the parties. While the MOA does not
obligate funds, it could specify the authorities who can obligate funds. In support of information
exchange, the MOU and MOA collectively address:
• Objectives and purpose for the information exchange;
• Relevant authorities and responsibilities of each organization;
• Terms and conditions for the agreement and exchange of information in a secure manner,
including what constitutes acceptable use of the information to be exchanged;
• Financial responsibilities for the exchange; and
• Timeline for discontinuing or reauthorizing the information exchange.
The MOU and MOA do not include technical details on how the information exchange is established or
maintained or specific security requirements for the exchange; that is the function of the ISA. An MOU/A
is indicated for use in conjunction with an ISA when the information is exchanged via a system
interconnection, as described in Section 2.1.1, and may be indicated when moderate- or high-impact
information is exchanged via database or web-based service or when high-impact information is
exchanged via email, portable storage device, or file transfer. Note that if there are no financial
responsibilities associated with the exchange, the MOA may not be indicated. An MOU/A template and
development guidance are provided in Appendix C.
3.1.5.3 Information Exchange Agreement
An information exchange agreement (IEA) is a document that specifies protection requirements and
responsibilities for information being exchanged. The IEA is similar to the ISA but does not include
technical details associated with an interconnection. Specifically, the IEA describes the protection
requirements and controls necessary to protect exchanged information and the systems processing,
storing, or transmitting the information and provides a signature line for participating organizations. An
IEA may be indicated when the information exchange occurs via one of the exchange methods described
in Section 2.1.2. An IEA template is provided in Appendix C.
3.1.5.4 Service-Level Agreement
A service-level agreement (SLA) represents a commitment between a service provider and one or more
customers and addresses specific aspects of the service, such as responsibilities, details on the type of
service, expected performance level (e.g., reliability, acceptable quality, and response times), and
requirements for reporting, resolution, and termination. Specific to information exchange and
interconnections, SLAs explicitly address expectations regarding the availability of the connection used
to exchange the information. SLAs are often part of a formal contract. An SLA may be indicated for
information exchange when the impact of a loss of availability is moderate or high and the information
is exchanged via an interconnection provided as part of a contract with a service provider. [SP 800-35]
provides information on information technology services and service-level agreements.
3.1.5.5 User Agreement, Access Agreement, and Acceptable Use Agreement
User agreements, access agreements, and acceptable use agreements are user-based agreements that
are similar to rules of behavior and specify user responsibilities when exchanging information or
accessing information or systems that contain the exchanged information. User responsibilities 
addressed in the agreement may include but are not limited to what the user is permitted to do with the
information, how the information is to be used, and whether the information can be transmitted to
other parties. Users with access to the information read and sign the agreement to acknowledge
acceptance and understanding prior to being given access to the information. The user, access, or
acceptable use agreement may be specific to the information being exchanged, or the participating
organizations may determine that existing agreements or rules of behavior already read and signed by
participating organizational users provide sufficient protection.
A user, access, or acceptable use agreement may be indicated for any type of information exchange
when the information being exchanged is moderate or high impact.
3.1.5.6 Non-Disclosure Agreement
A non-disclosure agreement (NDA) delineates specific information, materials, or knowledge that the
signatories agree not to release or divulge to any other parties. An NDA may be valid for a defined time
frame or may be indefinite.
A non-disclosure agreement may be indicated for information exchange when the information being
exchanged is high impact for confidentiality or is personally identifiable information.
3.1.5.7 Other Types of Agreements, Organization-Defined Agreement
Contracts, agreements that combine elements of the other agreement types, internet service
agreements, or other organization-defined agreements may also be applied to the information
exchange, as appropriate.
In support of mission or business needs, organizations may enter into interagency and/or
interorganizational agreements that are not specific to information exchange but could include the need
to exchange information. If information exchange is required to support another agreement, the
organization follows the guidance in this publication to determine specific protection and agreement
needs for the information to be exchanged.
3.1.5.8 Logged in Tracking System
A tracking system provides a method to log and track information exchange outside of the authorization
boundary. Examples of tracking systems include but are not limited to internal spreadsheets or
databases; Governance, Risk, and Compliance (GRC) tools or other automated tools; and keeping up-to-date control implementation information in a system security plan. Note that requirements for tracking
information exchanges may be addressed as part of other types of agreements (e.g., ISA and IEA).
3.1.6 Step 6: Approve or Reject the Information Exchange
The joint planning team submits the proposed agreements to the relevant AO or other risk management
official from each organization and requests approval for the information exchange. Upon receipt, the
AOs or risk management officials review the proposed agreements as well as any other relevant
documentation or activities. Based on the review, the AOs or risk management officials decide on one of
the following:
• Approve the information exchange, or
• Reject the information exchange.
If the AOs or risk management officials accept the agreement(s), they sign and date the documents,
thereby approving the information exchange. The agreements are then retained by participating
organizations in accordance with organizational retention policies and procedures. Notify the
appropriate program manager or any other officials responsible for the information and information
exchange within each organization that the agreement to exchange information has been approved.
If the agreements are rejected by one or more AO or risk management official, the AO or risk
management official may propose solutions and/or specify additional requirements to be completed
before approval is granted, including the implementation of additional security controls. In addition, a
timeline for completing the tasks is specified. The joint planning team works to meet the requirements,
then resubmits the updated exchange agreements.
3.1.7 Emergency Information Exchange
Emergency situations may arise that necessitate an immediate information exchange. When time does
not allow for following the established information exchange security management process, the
information exchange can still be managed and controlled. For example, prior to the exchange, the
organization may include instructions for handling and protecting the information, restrictions for access
to the information, or user access or non-disclosure agreements.
It is incumbent upon information and/or system owners to, at a minimum, document the information
exchanged as part of the emergency, the justification for the emergency exchange, and the roles and
specific individuals involved in the emergency exchange. Emergency information exchanges are
reviewed by participating organizations as soon as is practical after the emergency exchange. If the
emergency exchange is to become a recurring or permanent exchange, participating organizations
conduct the information exchange security management process after the initial emergency exchange. If
the emergency exchange is an isolated event, participating organizations ensure protection of the
information commensurate with risk and may follow up with appropriate agreements. 
3.2 Establishing the Information Exchange
After the information exchange is planned and approved, it may be implemented. This section provides
recommended steps for establishing the information exchange, as shown in Figure 4.
3.2.1 Step 1: Develop an Implementation Plan
To ensure that information is exchanged securely, the joint planning team develops an information
exchange implementation plan. The purpose of the implementation plan is to centralize all aspects of
the information exchange effort in one document and to clarify how the technical requirements
specified in the agreement(s) will be implemented. A well-developed implementation plan greatly
improves the likelihood that the information exchange is implemented successfully and securely.
As appropriate, the implementation plan:
• Describes the systems involved in the information exchange
• Identifies the impact level of the information to be exchanged
• Identifies personnel responsible for establishing and maintaining the information exchange
and specifies their responsibilities
• Identifies implementation tasks and procedures
• Identifies and describes security controls implemented to protect the confidentiality, 
integrity, and availability of the exchanged information
• Provides control assessment and measurement criteria to help ensure that the information
is exchanged securely
• Specifies training requirements for users (if applicable), including a training schedule
• Cites or includes all relevant documentation, such as system security plans, design
specifications, and standard operating procedures
3.2.2 Step 2: Execute the Implementation Plan
After the implementation plan is developed, reviewed, and approved by senior members of the planning
team, the plan may then be executed. A list of recommended tasks for implementing an information
exchange is provided below.
3.2.2.1 Install or Configure Hardware and Software
It may be necessary to install new hardware and software or to configure existing hardware and
software to support the information exchange.
3.2.2.2 Implement or Configure Security Controls
If security controls are not in place or are configured improperly, the process of establishing the
information exchange could expose the systems to access by unauthorized personnel. Therefore, the
first step is to implement appropriate security controls or to configure existing controls, as specified in
the agreement(s) and implementation plan. Security controls may include any of the controls from [SP
800-53] (based on risk assessment and system impact levels).
3.2.2.3 Integrate Applications
Integrate applications or protocols for services that support the information exchange. Examples include
but are not limited to database applications, email, web browsers, application servers, authentication
servers, domain servers, development tools, editing programs, and communications programs.
3.2.2.4 Conduct Operational and Security Testing
Conduct an assessment to determine if the equipment that supports the information exchange operates
properly and that there are no obvious ways for unauthorized users to circumvent or defeat security
controls. Test the interface between applications across the exchange, and simulate data traffic at
planned activity levels to verify correct translation at the receiving end. Test security controls under
realistic conditions. If possible, conduct testing in an isolated, non-operational environment to avoid
affecting the systems.
Document the results of the testing and compare them with a set of predetermined operational and
security requirements approved by each organization. Determine whether the results meet a mutually
agreed upon level of acceptable risk and whether other actions are required. Correct weaknesses or
problems and document the actions taken. Retest the exchange and implemented controls to ensure
that weaknesses or problems were eliminated and that new flaws have not been introduced.
3.2.2.5 Conduct Security Training and Awareness
Conduct security training and awareness for all authorized personnel who will be involved in managing,
using, or operating the information exchange. Periodically provide training and awareness for new users
and refresher training for all users. Distribute the rules of behavior to all personnel who will be
authorized to exchange information. Ensure that personnel know how to report suspicious or prohibited
activity and how to request assistance if they encounter problems.
3.2.2.6 Update System Security Plans
The organizations update their system security plans and related artifacts to reflect the changed security
environment in which their respective system operates. In addition, consider conducting mutual reviews
of those sections of the updated plans that are relevant to the information exchange. The details for
conducting mutual reviews are addressed in information exchange agreements.
It is recommended that the security plans include the following information regarding the information
exchange (and other information exchanges, if appropriate):
• Names of affected systems
• Participating organizations
• Method of exchange
• Names and titles of authorizing management officials
• Date of authorization
• Description/types of information to be exchanged
• Impact level of each type of information to be exchanged
• Impact level of affected systems
• Affected system interfaces
• Hardware inventory
• Software inventory
• Security concerns and rules of behavior governing the information exchange
See [SP 800-18], Guide for Developing Security Plans for Federal Information Systems, for more
information.
3.2.2.7 Conduct Security Assessment and Authorization Activities
Establishing an information exchange may represent a significant change to affected systems. Before
proceeding further, each participating organization assesses and authorizes their respective system to
provide assurance that security protections remain at an acceptable level of risk. [SP 800-37] provides
information on assessment and authorization activities as part of the NIST Risk Management
Framework.
3.2.3 Step 3: Activate the Information Exchange
Activate the information exchange for use by all parties, following prescribed guidelines. It is
recommended that the organizations closely monitor the information exchange for an agreed upon
period to ensure that it operates properly and securely. Analyze audit logs carefully and frequently and
monitor the types of assistance requested by users. Document and correct any weaknesses or problems
that occur.
3.3 Maintaining the Information Exchange
Once established, the information exchange is actively maintained to help ensure that the information is
exchanged securely. This section describes recommended activities for maintaining the information
exchange, as shown in Figure 5.
• Maintain clear lines of ongoing communication.
• Maintain systems and system components.
• Manage user accounts
• Conduct security assessments and ongoing authorization.
• Analyze event logs.
• Report and respond to security incidents.
• Coordinate contingency planning activities.
• Manage changes.
• Review and update system security plans and applicable agreements.
• Review continued need for the information exchange.
3.3.1 Maintain Clear Lines of Communication
It is critical that the organizations participating in an information exchange maintain clear lines of
communication and communicate regularly. Open lines of communication help to ensure that the
information exchange and any associated interconnections are properly maintained and that security
controls remain effective. Open communications also facilitate changes in management activities by
making it easy for all sides to notify each other about planned system changes that could affect the 
information exchange. Finally, maintaining clear lines of communication enables organizations to
promptly notify each other of security incidents and system disruptions and to conduct coordinated
responses.
Communication between designated personnel is accomplished by using procedures specified in
agreements associated with the information exchange. Topics for communication include but are not
limited to the following:
• Initial agreements and changes to agreements
• Changes in designated management and technical personnel
• Activities related to establishing and maintaining the information exchange
• Changes to management activities that could affect the information exchange
• Security incidents that could affect systems and data associated with the information
exchange
• Contingencies that disrupt any of the systems associated with the information exchange
• Termination of the information exchange
• Planned restoration of the information exchange
3.3.2 Maintain Systems and System Components
The participating organizations agree on the ownership and maintenance of any systems and system
components used to facilitate the information exchange. Systems and system components are
maintained in accordance with implemented controls from the [SP 800-53] Maintenance family.
3.3.3 Manage User Accounts
User accounts associated with the information exchange are actively managed in accordance with
implemented controls from the [SP 800-53] Access Control, Identification and Authentication, and
Personnel Security families.
3.3.4 Conduct Security Assessments
Security controls that support the information exchange are assessed with the frequency agreed upon
by the participating organizations, whenever a significant change occurs, and/or in accordance with
organizational continuous monitoring programs to ensure that the controls are operating effectively and
are providing adequate protection.
Security assessments may be conducted by the designated audit authorities of one or all of the
participating organizations or by an independent third party. The organizations agree on the rigor of
reviews as well as processes for reporting and responding to assessment findings.
SPs [800-37], [800-53A], and [800-115] and [NISTIR 8011] provide guidance on conducting security
assessments. [SP 800-137] provides guidance on continuous monitoring.
3.3.5 Analyze Event Logs
Event logs for systems and system components associated with the information exchange are analyzed
with the frequency agreed upon by the participating organizations to detect and track unusual or
suspicious activities. Event logs are managed in accordance with implemented controls from the [SP 
800-53] Audit and Accountability family. [SP 800-92] provides guidance on log management.
3.3.6 Report and Respond to Security Incidents
Organizations that participate in the information exchange notify each other of security incidents or
suspected security incidents that affect systems or system components associated with the information
exchange. The organizations then take appropriate steps to isolate and respond to such incidents in
accordance with their respective incident response procedures and implemented controls from the [SP
800-53] Incident Response family. Depending on the type and severity of the incident, organizations
may need to coordinate incident response activities or even terminate the information exchange. The
applicable agreements for the information exchange address the roles and responsibilities for incident
response for each participating organization, along with incident notification and emergency
termination processes. Incidents are reported in accordance with applicable laws, executive orders,
directives, regulations, policies, standards, and guidelines. SPs [800-61], [800-83], and [800-86] provide
guidance on incident response. Also see [US-Cert Federal Incident Notification Guidelines].
3.3.7 Coordinate Contingency Planning Activities
The organizations coordinate contingency planning training, testing, and exercises to minimize the
impact of disasters and other contingencies that could damage systems involved in the information
exchange or jeopardize the confidentiality, integrity, or availability of shared data. Give special attention
to emergency alerts and notifications, damage assessments, and response and recovery, including data
retrieval. The organizations may consider developing joint procedures based on existing contingency
plans, if appropriate. Finally, the organizations notify each other about changes to emergency POC
information (primary and alternate), including changes in staffing, addresses, telephone and fax
numbers, and email addresses. [SP 800-34] provides guidance on contingency planning.
3.3.8 Manage Configuration Changes
Effective configuration management is critical to the maintenance and security of the information
exchange. Each organization establishes a change control board (CCB) or a similar body to review and
approve planned changes to its respective systems, such as upgrading software or adding services.
The decision to upgrade or modify a system is based on the security requirements specified in applicable
agreements and a determination that the change will not adversely affect the exchange of information.
It is recommended that planned changes be tested in an isolated, non-operational environment to avoid
affecting systems. In addition, notify other parties of the changes in writing, and allow participating
organizations to be involved in the process.
If a planned change is specifically applicable to the information exchange, participating organizations
establish a joint CCB or a similar body to review and approve the change. In most cases, such changes
are designed to improve the operation and security of the information exchange, such as by adding new
functions, improving user interfaces, and eliminating (or mitigating) known vulnerabilities. Nevertheless,
it is critical that organizations carefully review the changes before implementing them and manage and
track the changes after they are made. [SP 800-128] provides guidance on security-focused
configuration management.
3.3.9 Review and Maintain System Security Plans and Applicable Agreements
System security plans, applicable agreements (e.g., ISA, MOU/MOA, IEA, and access agreements), and
other relevant documentation pertaining to the information exchange are reviewed and updated with a
frequency agreed upon by the participating organizations or whenever there is a significant change to
systems associated with the information exchange. Refer to [SP 800-18] for information on updating
system security plans.
3.3.10 Review the Continued Need for the Information Exchange
The business case for continuing the information exchange is reviewed with a frequency agreed upon by
the participating organizations to determine if the exchange of information remains necessary. If the
information exchange is no longer necessary, Section 3.4 provides information on discontinuing the
information exchange.
3.4 Discontinuing the Information Exchange
This section describes the process for discontinuing the information exchange, as shown in Figure 6. To
the greatest extent possible, the information exchange is discontinued in a methodical manner to avoid
system disruptions. 
3.4.1 Planned Discontinuance
The decision to discontinue the information exchange involves appropriate managerial, security, and
technical staff and is based on a valid rationale, such as ongoing security failures by one or more
participants or the lack of a mission-based need to continue the exchange. Before discontinuing the
information exchange, the initiating party notifies the other parties in writing and waits to receive an
acknowledgment in return. The notification describes the reasons for discontinuing the information
exchange, provides the proposed timeline for the discontinuance, and identifies the technical and
managerial staff who will conduct the discontinuance.
An organization may have a variety of reasons to discontinue the information exchange, including:
• Changed mission or business needs
• Failed security assessments, including increases in risks that rise to unacceptable levels
• Inability to abide by the technical specifications of agreements
• Inability to abide by the terms and conditions of the agreements
• Cost considerations, including increases in the cost of maintaining the exchange
• Changes in system configuration or in the physical location of equipment
Schedule the discontinuance of the information exchange so that it permits a reasonable period for
internal business planning and allows participants to make appropriate preparations, including notifying
affected users and identifying alternative resources for continuing operations. In addition, managerial
and technical staff from each organization coordinate to determine the logistics of discontinuing the
information exchange and the disposition of shared data, including purging and overwriting moderate- or high-impact data and coordinating with records management. Discontinue the information exchange
when the impact on users is minimal, based on known activity patterns. Following the discontinuance,
each organization updates affected system security plans and related documents to reflect the changed
security environment in which its respective systems operate.
3.4.2 Emergency Discontinuance
If a participating organization detects an attack, intrusion attempt, or other contingency that exploits or
jeopardizes the information or systems involved in the information exchange, it might be necessary to
abruptly terminate the information exchange without providing written notice to the other party. Such
an extraordinary measure is taken only in extreme circumstances and only after consultation with
appropriate technical staff and senior management.
The decision to make an emergency discontinuance is made by the system owner and implemented by
technical staff. If the system owner is unavailable, a predesignated staff member may authorize the
discontinuance in accordance with written criteria that stipulate the conditions under which this
authority can be exercised.
The system owner or designee immediately notifies the other party's emergency contact by telephone
or other verbal method and receives confirmation of the notification. All parties work together to isolate
and investigate the incident in accordance with incident response procedures, including conducting a
damage assessment and reviewing audit logs and security controls. If the incident was an attack or an
intrusion attempt, the parties notify the relevant law enforcement authorities and make every attempt
to preserve evidence.
After the emergency discontinuance, the initiating party provides a written notification to the other
party in a timely manner. The notification describes the nature of the incident, explains why the
information exchange was discontinued, describes how the information exchange was terminated, and
identifies actions taken to isolate and investigate the incident. In addition, the notification may specify
when and under what conditions the information exchange may be restored.
3.4.3 Resumption of Interconnection
The organizations may choose to resume the information exchange after it has been discontinued. The
decision to resume the information exchange is based on the cause and duration of the discontinuance.
For example, if the information exchange was discontinued because of an attack, intrusion, or other
contingency, all parties implement appropriate countermeasures to prevent a recurrence of the
problem and modify agreements to address any issues that require attention. Alternatively, if the
information exchange has been discontinued for a long period of time (e.g., several months or more), 
each party performs a risk assessment on its respective system and reexamines all relevant planning and
implementation issues, including the development of new agreements.