Abstract
The protection of Controlled Unclassified Information (CUI) resident in nonfederal systems and
organizations is of paramount importance to federal agencies and can directly impact the ability
of the Federal Government to successfully conduct its essential missions and functions. This
publication provides federal agencies with recommended enhanced security requirements for
protecting the confidentiality of CUI: (1) when the information is resident in nonfederal systems
and organizations; (2) when the nonfederal organization is not collecting or maintaining
information on behalf of a federal agency or using or operating a system on behalf of an agency;
and (3) where there are no specific safeguarding requirements for protecting the confidentiality
of CUI prescribed by the authorizing law, regulation, or government-wide policy for the CUI
category listed in the CUI Registry. The enhanced requirements apply to components of
nonfederal systems that process, store, or transmit CUI or that provide security protection for
such components when the designated CUI is associated with a critical program or high value
asset. The enhanced requirements supplement the basic and derived security requirements in
NIST Special Publication 800-171 and are intended for use by federal agencies in contractual
vehicles or other agreements established between those agencies and nonfederal organizations.
HOW TO USE THIS PUBLICATION
This publication is a supplement to NIST Special Publication 800-171 [SP 800-171]. It contains
recommendations for enhanced security requirements to provide additional protection for
Controlled Unclassified Information (CUI) in nonfederal systems and organizations when such
information is associated with critical programs or high value assets. The enhanced security
requirements are designed to respond to the advanced persistent threat (APT) and supplement
the basic and derived security requirements in [SP 800-171]. While the security requirements in
[SP 800-171] focus primarily on confidentiality protection, the enhanced security requirements
in this publication address confidentiality, integrity, and availability protection. The enhanced
security requirements are implemented in addition to the basic and derived requirements since
those requirements are not designed to address the APT. The enhanced security requirements
apply to those components of nonfederal systems that process, store, or transmit CUI or that
provide protection for such components.
There is no expectation that all of the enhanced security requirements will be selected by federal
agencies implementing this guidance. The decision to select a particular set of enhanced security
requirements will be based on the mission and business needs of federal agencies and guided
and informed by ongoing risk assessments. The enhanced security requirements for nonfederal
systems processing, storing, or transmitting CUI associated with critical programs or high value
assets will be conveyed to nonfederal organizations by federal agencies in a contract, grant, or
other agreement. The application of the enhanced security requirements to subcontractors will
also be addressed by federal agencies in consultation with nonfederal organizations.
THE APPLICABILITY OF ENHANCED SECURITY REQUIREMENTS
The enhanced security requirements are only applicable to a nonfederal system or nonfederal
organization as mandated by a federal agency in a contract, grant, or other agreement. The
requirements apply to the components of nonfederal systems that process, store, or transmit
CUI associated with a critical program or a high value asset or that provide protection for such
components. The requirements also apply to services, including externally provided services,
that process, store, or transmit CUI, or that provide security protections, for the system requiring
enhanced protection. The protection of a specific service to include CUI that is processed, stored
or transmitted during the provision of that service, is achieved by implementing the enhanced
security requirements for the service, or the system or system components responsible for
providing that service.
In addition to protecting CUI from unauthorized disclosure, the enhanced security requirements
have been designed to protect the integrity and availability of CUI. This is achieved by promoting
penetration-resistant architectures, damage-limiting operations, and designs to help achieve
cyber resiliency and survivability.
The term organizational system is used in many of the enhanced security requirements. It has a
specific meaning regarding the applicability of the enhanced requirements as described above.
Appropriate scoping considerations for the requirements are important factors in determining
protection-related investment decisions and managing security risk for nonfederal organizations
that have the responsibility of protecting CUI associated with critical programs and high value
assets.
FRAMEWORK FOR IMPROVING CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE CYBERSECURITY
Organizations that have implemented or plan to implement the NIST Framework for Improving
Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity [NIST CSF] can find in Appendix C a mapping of the enhanced
security requirements in this publication to the security controls in [SP 800-53]. The security
control mappings can be useful to organizations that wish to demonstrate compliance to the
security requirements in the context of their established information security programs when
such programs have been built using the NIST security controls.
CHAPTER ONE
INTRODUCTION
THE NEED TO PROTECT CONTROLLED UNCLASSIFIED INFORMATION
Today, more than at any time in history, the Federal Government relies on external service
providers to help carry out a wide range of federal missions and business functions using
information systems. Many federal contractors, for example, routinely process, store, and
transmit sensitive federal information in their systems to support the delivery of essential
products and services to federal agencies (e.g., financial services, providing web and electronic
mail services, processing security clearances or healthcare data, providing cloud services, and
developing communications, satellite, and weapons systems). Federal information is frequently
provided to or shared with entities such as state and local governments, colleges and
universities, and independent research organizations. The protection of sensitive federal
information while residing in nonfederal systems and organizations is of paramount importance
to federal agencies and can directly impact the ability of the Federal Government to carry out its
designated missions and business operations.
The protection of unclassified federal information in nonfederal systems and organizations is
dependent on the Federal Government providing a process for identifying the different types of
information that are used by federal agencies. [EO 13556] established a government-wide
Controlled Unclassified Information (CUI) Program to standardize the way that the executive
branch handles unclassified information that requires protection. Only information that
requires safeguarding or dissemination controls pursuant to federal law, regulation, or
government-wide policy may be designated as CUI. The CUI Program is designed to address
several deficiencies in managing and protecting unclassified information, including inconsistent
markings, inadequate safeguarding, and needless restrictions, both by standardizing procedures
and by providing common definitions through a CUI Registry [NARA CUI].
The CUI Registry is the online repository of information, guidance, policy, and requirements on
handling CUI, including issuances by the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)
CUI Executive Agent. The CUI Registry identifies approved CUI categories, provides general 
descriptions for each, identifies the basis for controls, and sets out procedures for the use of
CUI, including but not limited to marking, safeguarding, transporting, disseminating, reusing,
and disposing of the information.
[EO 13556] also required that the CUI Program emphasize openness, transparency, and
uniformity of government-wide practices, and that the implementation of the program take
place in a manner consistent with applicable policies established by the Office of Management
and Budget (OMB) and federal standards and guidelines issued by the National Institute of
Standards and Technology (NIST). The federal CUI regulation, developed by the CUI Executive
Agent, provides guidance to federal agencies on the designation, safeguarding, dissemination,
marking, decontrolling, and disposition of CUI; establishes self-inspection and oversight
requirements; and delineates other facets of the program.
In certain situations, CUI may be associated with a critical program or a high value asset. These
critical programs and high value assets are potential targets for the advanced persistent threat
(APT). An APT is an adversary or adversarial group that possesses the expertise and resources
that allow it to create opportunities to achieve its objectives by using multiple attack vectors,
including cyber, physical, and deception. The APT objectives include establishing a foothold
within the infrastructure of targeted organizations for purposes of exfiltrating information;
undermining or impeding critical aspects of a mission, function, program, or organization; or
positioning itself to carry out these objectives in the future. The APT pursues its objectives
repeatedly over an extended period, adapts to defenders' efforts to resist it, and is determined
to maintain the level of interaction needed to execute its objectives. While the category of CUI
itself does not require greater protection, CUI associated with critical programs or high value
assets is at greater risk because the APT is more likely to target such information and therefore
requires additional protection.
CUI ENHANCED SECURITY REQUIREMENTS
Controlled Unclassified Information has the same value, whether such information is resident in
a federal system that belongs to a federal agency or a nonfederal system that belongs to a
nonfederal organization. Accordingly, the enhanced security requirements in this publication
are consistent with and complementary to the guidelines used by federal agencies to protect
CUI. The requirements are only applicable to a nonfederal system or nonfederal organization as
mandated by a federal agency in a contract, grant, or other agreement.
The APT is extremely dangerous to the national and economic security interests of the United
States since organizations are very dependent on systems of all types, including traditional
Information Technology (IT) systems, Operational Technology (OT) systems, Internet of Things
(IoT) systems, and Industrial IoT (IIoT) systems. The convergence of these types of systems has
brought forth a new class of systems known as cyber-physical systems, many of which are in
sectors of U.S. critical infrastructure, including energy, transportation, defense, manufacturing,
healthcare, finance, and information and communications. Therefore, CUI that is processed,
stored, or transmitted by any of the above systems related to a critical program or high value
asset requires additional protection from the APT.
1.1 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY
The purpose of this publication is to provide federal agencies with a set of enhanced security
requirements for protecting the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of CUI: (1) when the
CUI is resident in a nonfederal system and organization, (2) when the nonfederal organization is
not collecting or maintaining information on behalf of a federal agency or using or operating a
system on behalf of an agency, and (3) where there are no specific safeguarding requirements
for protecting the CUI prescribed by the authorizing law, regulation, or government-wide policy
for the CUI category listed in the CUI Registry. The enhanced security requirements address
the protection of CUI by promoting: (1) penetration-resistant architecture, (2) damage-limiting
operations, and (3) designs to achieve cyber resiliency and survivability. The enhanced security
requirements are intended to supplement the basic and derived security requirements in [SP
800-171] and are for use by federal agencies in contractual vehicles or other agreements
established between those agencies and nonfederal organizations.
The enhanced security requirements apply to components of nonfederal systems that process,
store, or transmit CUI associated with a critical program or a high value asset or that provide
security protection for such components. If nonfederal organizations designate specific system
components for the processing, storage, or transmission of CUI associated with a critical
program or a high value asset, those organizations may limit the scope of the enhanced security
requirements by isolating the designated system components in a separate CUI security domain.
Isolation can be achieved by applying architectural and design concepts (e.g., implementing
subnetworks with firewalls or other boundary protection devices and using information flow
control mechanisms). Security domains may employ physical separation, logical separation, or a
combination of both. This approach can provide adequate protection for the CUI and avoid 
increasing the organization's security posture to a level beyond that which it requires for
protecting its missions, operations, and assets.
This publication does not provide guidance on which organizational programs or assets are
determined to be critical or of high value. Those determinations are made by the organizations
mandating the use of the enhanced security requirements for additional protection and can be
informed and guided by laws, executive orders, directives, regulations, or policies. Additionally,
this publication does not provide guidance on specific types of threats or attack scenarios that
justify the use of the enhanced security requirements. Finally, there is no expectation that all of
the enhanced security requirements will be needed in every situation. Rather, the selection
decisions will be made by organizations based on mission and business needs and risk.
1.2 TARGET AUDIENCE
This publication serves individuals and organizations in the public and private sectors with:
• System development life cycle responsibilities (e.g., program managers, mission or business
owners, information owners or stewards, system designers and developers, system and
security engineers, systems integrators);
• System, security, or risk management and oversight responsibilities (e.g., authorizing
officials, chief information officers, chief information security officers, system owners,
information security managers);
• Security assessment and monitoring responsibilities (e.g., auditors, system evaluators,
assessors, independent verifiers or validators, analysts); and
• Acquisition or procurement responsibilities (e.g., contracting officers).
The above roles and responsibilities can be viewed from two distinct perspectives: the federal
perspective, as the entity establishing and conveying the security requirements in contractual
vehicles or other types of inter-organizational agreements, and the nonfederal perspective, as
the entity responding to and complying with the security requirements set forth in contracts or
agreements.
1.3 ORGANIZATION OF THIS SPECIAL PUBLICATION
The remainder of this special publication is organized as follows:
• Chapter Two describes the basic assumptions used to develop the enhanced security
requirements for protecting CUI, the organization and structure of the requirements, and
the flexibility in applying the requirements.
• Chapter Three describes the 14 families of enhanced security requirements for protecting
CUI in nonfederal systems and organizations.
• Supporting appendices provide additional information related to the protection of CUI.
These include the References, Glossary, Acronyms, and Mapping Tables relating the
enhanced security requirements to the security controls in [SP 800-53] and whether the
requirements promote penetration-resistant architecture, damage-limiting operations, and
designing for cyber resiliency and survivability.
CHAPTER TWO
THE FUNDAMENTALS
ASSUMPTIONS FOR DEVELOPING ENHANCED SECURITY REQUIREMENTS
This chapter describes the approach used to develop the enhanced security requirements to
protect CUI in nonfederal systems and organizations. It also covers the organization and
structure of the enhanced security requirements and provides links to the security control
mapping tables in Appendix C.
2.1 DEVELOPMENT APPROACH
The enhanced security requirements described in this publication have been developed based
on four fundamental assumptions:
• Statutory and regulatory requirements for the protection of CUI are consistent, whether
such information resides in federal or nonfederal systems and organizations.
• Safeguards implemented to protect CUI are consistent in federal and nonfederal systems
and organizations.
• The impact value for CUI is no less than [FIPS 199] moderate.
• Additional protections are necessary to protect CUI associated with critical programs or high
value assets.
The assumptions reinforce the concept that CUI has the same value and potential adverse
impact if compromised, whether such information is located in a federal or a nonfederal
organization. Additional assumptions that also impact the development of the enhanced
security requirements and the expectation of federal agencies in working with nonfederal
organizations include:
• Nonfederal organizations have specific safeguarding measures in place to protect their
information, which may also be sufficient to satisfy the enhanced security requirements.
• Nonfederal organizations can implement a variety of security solutions directly or using
external service providers (e.g., managed services) to satisfy the enhanced security
requirements.
• Nonfederal organizations may not have the necessary organizational structure or resources
to satisfy a particular enhanced security requirement and may implement alternative but
equally effective security measures to satisfy the intent of the requirement.
• Federal agencies define, in appropriate contracts or other agreements, the organization-defined parameters for applicable enhanced security requirements. 
The enhanced security requirements provide the foundation for a multidimensional, defense-in-depth protection strategy that includes three mutually supportive and reinforcing components:
(1) penetration-resistant architecture, (2) damage-limiting operations, and (3) designing for
cyber resiliency and survivability [SP 800-160-2]. This strategy recognizes that despite the best
protection measures implemented by organizations, the APT may find ways to compromise or
breach boundary defenses and deploy malicious code within a defender's system. When this
situation occurs, organizations must have access to safeguards and countermeasures to detect,
outmaneuver, confuse, deceive, mislead, and impede the adversary—that is, removing the
adversary's tactical advantage and protecting the organization's critical programs and high value
assets. Figure 1 shows the complementary nature of the enhanced security requirements when
implemented as part of a multidimensional asset protection strategy.
While the enhanced security requirements can be implemented comprehensively, organizations
may—as part of their overarching risk management strategy—select a subset of the security
requirements. However, there are dependencies among certain requirements which will affect
the selection process. The enhanced security requirements are intended for use by federal
agencies in the contractual vehicles or other agreements established between those agencies
and nonfederal organizations. Specific implementation guidance for the selected requirements
can be provided by federal agencies to nonfederal organizations in such contractual vehicles or
agreements.
The enhanced security requirements are derived from the security controls in [SP 800-53]. The
requirements represent methods for protecting information (and CUI, in particular) against
cyber-attacks from advanced cyber threats and for ensuring the cyber resiliency of systems and 
organizations while under attack. The enhanced security requirements focus on the following
key elements, which are essential to addressing the APT:
• Applying a threat-centric approach to security requirements specification;
• Employing system and security architectures that support logical and physical isolation using
system and network segmentation techniques, virtual machines, and containers;
• Implementing dual authorization controls for the most critical or sensitive operations;
• Limiting persistent storage to isolated enclaves or domains;
• Implementing a comply-to-connect approach for systems and networks;
• Extending configuration management requirements by establishing authoritative sources for
addressing changes to systems and system components;
• Periodically refreshing or upgrading organizational systems and system components to a
known state or developing new systems or components;
• Employing a security operations center with advanced analytics to support continuous
monitoring and protection of organizational systems; and
• Using deception to confuse and mislead adversaries regarding the information they use for
decision-making, the value and authenticity of the information they attempt to exfiltrate, or
the environment in which they are operating.
2.2 ORGANIZATION AND STRUCTURE
The enhanced security requirements are organized into 14 families consistent with the families
for basic and derived requirements. Each family contains the requirements related to the
general security topic of the family. The families are closely aligned with the minimum security
requirements for federal information and information systems in [FIPS 200]. The security
requirements for contingency planning, system and services acquisition, and planning are not
included within the scope of this publication due to the tailoring criteria in [SP 800-171]. Table 1
lists the security requirement families addressed in this publication.
The structure of an enhanced security requirement is similar to the basic and derived security
requirements in [SP 800-171]. For some requirements, additional flexibility is provided by
allowing organizations to define specific values for the designated parameters. Flexibility is
achieved using assignment and selection operations embedded within certain requirements. The
assignment and selection operations provide the capability to customize the enhanced security
requirements based on organizational protection needs. Determination of organization-defined
parameter values can be guided and informed by laws, executive orders, directives, regulations,
policies, standards, guidance, or mission or business needs. Risk assessments and risk tolerance
are also important factors in defining the values for requirement parameters. Once specified,
the values for the assignment and selection operations become part of the requirement.
Following each enhanced security requirement, a discussion section provides additional
information to facilitate the implementation of the requirement. This information is primarily
derived from the security controls discussion sections in [SP 800-53] and is provided to give
organizations a better understanding of the mechanisms and procedures that can be used to
implement the controls used to protect CUI. The discussion section is informational only. It is
not intended to extend the scope of the enhanced security requirements. The discussion section
also includes informative references.
Finally, a protection strategy and adversary effects section describe the potential effects of
implementing the enhanced security requirements on risk, specifically by reducing the likelihood
of the occurrence of threat events, the ability of threat events to cause harm, and the extent of
that harm. Five high-level, desired effects on the adversary can be identified: redirect, preclude,
impede, limit, and expose. Each adversary effect is further decomposed to include specific
impacts on risk and expected results. These adversary effects are described in [SP 800-160-2]
and in Appendix D.
ASSIGNMENT AND SELECTION OPERATIONS
The parameter values for assignment and selection operations in designated enhanced security
requirements are determined by the cognizant federal agency. However, the parameter values
should be coordinated with the nonfederal organization. This reflects situations in which the
parameter values are dependent on specific characteristics, attributes, or conditions within the
nonfederal organization or system (e.g., system architecture, design, or implementation).
Similar to the basic and derived requirements, the enhanced security requirements are mapped
to the security controls in [SP 800-53], the source from which the requirements were derived.
The mappings, which can be found in tables C-1 through C-14, are provided for informational
purposes only, noting that the related controls do not provide additional requirements.
Figure 2 illustrates an example of an enhanced security requirement.
2.3 FLEXIBLE APPLICATION
The enhanced security requirements are applied, as necessary, to protect CUI associated with a
critical program or a high value asset. Federal agencies may limit application as long as the
needed protection is achieved, such as by applying the enhanced security requirements to the
components of nonfederal systems that process, store, or transmit CUI associated with a critical
program or high value asset; provide protection for such components; or provide a direct attack
path to such components (e.g., due to established trust relationships between system
components).
There is no expectation that all of the enhanced security requirements will be selected by every
federal agency. The decision to select enhanced security requirements will be based on the
specific mission and business protection needs of the agency, group of agencies, or the federal
government (i.e., federal entity) and will be guided and informed by ongoing assessments of
risk. The selection of enhanced security requirements for a nonfederal system processing,
storing, or transmitting CUI associated with a critical program or a high value asset will be
conveyed to the nonfederal organization by the federal entity in a contract, grant, or other
agreement. The application of the enhanced security requirements to subcontractors will also
be addressed by the federal entity in consultation with the nonfederal organization.
Certain enhanced security requirements may be too difficult or cost prohibitive for organizations
to meet internally. In these situations, the use of external service providers can be leveraged
to satisfy the requirements. The services include but are not limited to:
• Threat intelligence
• Threat and adversary hunting
• System monitoring and security management
• IT infrastructure, platform, and software services
• Threat, vulnerability, and risk assessments
• Response and recovery
• Cyber resiliency
Finally, specific implementation guidance associated with the enhanced security requirements is
beyond the scope of this publication. Organizations have maximum flexibility in the methods,
techniques, technologies, and approaches used to satisfy the enhanced security requirements.
IMPLEMENTATION TIPS FOR FEDERAL AGENCIES
1. Select the set of enhanced security requirements needed to protect CUI in the nonfederal
system or organization.
2. Complete the assignment and selection operations (where applicable) in the set of
enhanced security requirements selected by the agency.
3. Develop implementation guidance for nonfederal organizations if desired or needed.
4. Include the enhanced security requirements and implementation guidance in federal
contracts or other agreements with nonfederal organizations.
CHAPTER THREE
THE REQUIREMENTS
ENHANCED SECURITY REQUIREMENTS FOR THE ADVANCED PERSISTENT THREAT
his chapter describes enhanced security requirements to protect the confidentiality,
integrity, and availability of CUI in nonfederal systems and organizations from the APT.
The enhanced security requirements are not required for any particular category or article
of CUI. However, if a federal agency determines that CUI is associated with a critical program or
a high value asset, the information and the system processing, storing, or transmitting such
information are potential targets for the APT and, therefore, may require enhanced protection.
Such protection, expressed through the enhanced security requirements, is mandated by a
federal agency in a contract, grant, or other agreement. The enhanced security requirements
are implemented in addition to the basic and derived requirements contained in [SP 800-171]
since the basic and derived requirements are not designed to address the APT.
Associated with each enhanced security requirement is an identification of which of the three
protection strategy areas (i.e., penetration-resistant architecture, damage-limiting operations,
and designing for cyber resiliency and survivability) the requirement supports and what
potential effects the requirement has on an adversary. This information is included to assist
organizations in ascertaining whether the requirement is appropriate. Ideally, the requirements
selected should be balanced across the three strategy areas. Selecting requirements that fall
exclusively in one area could result in an unbalanced response strategy for dealing with the APT.
Similarly, with regard to potential effects on adversaries, organizations should attempt to have
as broad a set of effects on an adversary as possible, given their specific mission or business
objectives.
3.1 ACCESS CONTROL
Enhanced Security Requirements
3.1.1e Employ dual authorization to execute critical or sensitive system and organizational
operations.
DISCUSSION
Dual authorization, also known as two-person control, reduces risk related to insider threats. Dual
authorization requires the approval of two authorized individuals to execute certain commands,
actions, or functions. For example, organizations employ dual authorization to help ensure that
changes to selected system components (i.e., hardware, software, and firmware) or information
cannot occur unless two qualified individuals approve and implement such changes. These
individuals possess the skills and expertise to determine if the proposed changes are correct
implementations of the approved changes, and they are also accountable for those changes.
Another example is employing dual authorization for the execution of privileged commands. To
reduce the risk of collusion, organizations consider rotating assigned dual authorization duties to
reduce the risk of an insider threat. Dual authorization can be implemented via either technical or
procedural measures and can be carried out sequentially or in parallel.
PROTECTION STRATEGY
Penetration-Resistant Architecture; Damage-Limiting Operations.
ADVERSARY EFFECTS
See [SP 800-160-2]: [Preclude (Preempt); Impede (Exert)].
3.1.2e Restrict access to systems and system components to only those information resources that
are owned, provisioned, or issued by the organization.
DISCUSSION
Information resources that are not owned, provisioned, or issued by the organization include
systems or system components owned by other organizations and personally owned devices. Non-organizational information resources present significant risks to the organization and complicate
the ability to employ a "comply-to-connect" policy or implement component or device attestation
techniques to ensure the integrity of the organizational system.
PROTECTION STRATEGY
Penetration-Resistant Architecture.
ADVERSARY EFFECTS
See [SP 800-160-2]: [Preclude (Preempt); Impede (Contain, Exert)].
3.1.3e Employ [Assignment: organization-defined secure information transfer solutions] to control
information flows between security domains on connected systems.
DISCUSSION
Organizations employ information flow control policies and enforcement mechanisms to control
the flow of information between designated sources and destinations within systems and between
connected systems. Flow control is based on the characteristics of the information and/or the
information path. Enforcement occurs, for example, in boundary protection devices that employ
rule sets or establish configuration settings that restrict system services, provide a packet-filtering
capability based on header information, or provide a message-filtering capability based on
message content. Organizations also consider the trustworthiness of filtering and inspection
mechanisms (i.e., hardware, firmware, and software components) that are critical to information
flow enforcement.
Transferring information between systems in different security domains with different security
policies introduces the risk that the transfers violate one or more domain security policies. In such
situations, information owners or information stewards provide guidance at designated policy
enforcement points between connected systems. Organizations mandate specific architectural
solutions when required to enforce logical or physical separation between systems in different
security domains. Enforcement includes prohibiting information transfers between connected
systems, employing hardware mechanisms to enforce one-way information flows, verifying write
permissions before accepting information from another security domain or connected system, and
implementing trustworthy regrading mechanisms to reassign security attributes and labels.
Secure information transfer solutions often include one or more of the following properties: use
of cross-domain solutions when traversing security domains, mutual authentication of the sender
and recipient (using hardware-based cryptography), encryption of data in transit and at rest,
isolation from other domains, and logging of information transfers (e.g., title of file, file size,
cryptographic hash of file, sender, recipient, transfer time and Internet Protocol [IP] address,
receipt time, and IP address).
PROTECTION STRATEGY
Penetration-Resistant Architecture.
ADVERSARY EFFECTS
See [SP 800-160-2]: [Preclude (Preempt); Impede (Contain, Exert)].
3.2 AWARENESS AND TRAINING
Enhanced Security Requirements
3.2.1e Provide awareness training [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] focused on
recognizing and responding to threats from social engineering, advanced persistent threat
actors, breaches, and suspicious behaviors; update the training [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] or when there are significant changes to the threat.
DISCUSSION
An effective method to detect APT activities and reduce the effectiveness of those activities is to
provide specific awareness training for individuals. A well-trained and security-aware workforce
provides another organizational safeguard that can be employed as part of a defense-in-depth
strategy to protect organizations against malicious code injections via email or web applications.
Threat awareness training includes educating individuals on the various ways that APTs can
infiltrate organizations, including through websites, emails, advertisement pop-ups, articles, and
social engineering. Training can include techniques for recognizing suspicious emails, the use of
removable systems in non-secure settings, and the potential targeting of individuals by adversaries
outside the workplace. Awareness training is assessed and updated periodically to ensure that the
training is relevant and effective, particularly with respect to the threat since it is constantly, and
often rapidly, evolving.
[SP 800-50] provides guidance on security awareness and training programs.
PROTECTION STRATEGY
Damage-Limiting Operations.
ADVERSARY EFFECTS
See [SP 800-160-2]: [Impede (Exert); Expose (Detect)].
3.2.2e Include practical exercises in awareness training for [Assignment: organization-defined roles]
that are aligned with current threat scenarios and provide feedback to individuals involved in
the training and their supervisors.
DISCUSSION
Awareness training is most effective when it is complemented by practical exercises tailored to the
tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTP) of the threat. Examples of practical exercises include
unannounced social engineering attempts to gain unauthorized access, collect information, or
simulate the adverse impact of opening malicious email attachments or invoking, via spear
phishing attacks, malicious web links. Rapid feedback is essential to reinforce desired user
behavior. Training results, especially failures of personnel in critical roles, can be indicative of a
potentially serious problem. It is important that senior management are made aware of such
situations so that they can take appropriate remediating actions.
[SP 800-181] provides guidance on role-based security training, including a lexicon and taxonomy
that describes cybersecurity work via work roles.
PROTECTION STRATEGY
Damage-Limiting Operations.
ADVERSARY EFFECTS
See [SP 800-160-2]: [Impede (Exert); Expose (Detect)].
3.3 AUDIT AND ACCOUNTABILITY
Enhanced Security Requirements
There are no enhanced security requirements for audit and accountability.
3.4 CONFIGURATION MANAGEMENT
Enhanced Security Requirements
3.4.1e Establish and maintain an authoritative source and repository to provide a trusted source and
accountability for approved and implemented system components.
DISCUSSION
The establishment and maintenance of an authoritative source and repository includes a system
component inventory of approved hardware, software, and firmware; approved system baseline
configurations and configuration changes; and verified system software and firmware, as well as
images and/or scripts. The authoritative source implements integrity controls to log changes or
attempts to change software, configurations, or data in the repository. Additionally, changes to
the repository are subject to change management procedures and require authentication of the
user requesting the change. In certain situations, organizations may also require dual authorization
for such changes. Software changes are routinely checked for integrity and authenticity to ensure
that the changes are legitimate when updating the repository and when refreshing a system from
the known, trusted source. The information in the repository is used to demonstrate adherence to
or identify deviation from the established configuration baselines and to restore system
components from a trusted source. From an automated assessment perspective, the system
description provided by the authoritative source is referred to as the desired state. The desired
state is compared to the actual state to check for compliance or deviations. [SP 800-128] provides
guidance on security configuration management, including security configuration settings and
configuration change control.
[IR 8011-1] provides guidance on automation support to assess system and system component
configurations.
PROTECTION STRATEGY
Penetration-Resistant Architecture; Designing for Cyber Resiliency and Survivability.
ADVERSARY EFFECTS
See [SP 800-160-2]: [Impede (Exert); Limit (Shorten); Expose (Detect)].
3.4.2e Employ automated mechanisms to detect misconfigured or unauthorized system components;
after detection, [Selection (one or more): remove the components; place the components in a
quarantine or remediation network] to facilitate patching, re-configuration, or other
mitigations.
DISCUSSION
System components used to process, store, transmit, or protect CUI are monitored and checked
against the authoritative source (i.e., hardware and software inventory and associated baseline
configurations). From an automated assessment perspective, the system description provided by
the authoritative source is referred to as the desired state. Using automated tools, the desired
state is compared to the actual state to check for compliance or deviations. Security responses to
system components that are unknown or that deviate from approved configurations can include
removing the components; halting system functions or processing; placing the system components
in a quarantine or remediation network that facilitates patching, re-configuration, or other
mitigations; or issuing alerts and/or notifications to personnel when there is an unauthorized
modification of an organization-defined configuration item. Responses can be automated, manual,
or procedural. Components that are removed from the system are rebuilt from the trusted
configuration baseline established by the authoritative source.
[IR 8011-1] provides guidance on using automation support to assess system configurations.
PROTECTION STRATEGY
Penetration-Resistant Architecture.
ADVERSARY EFFECTS
See [SP 800-160-2]: [Preclude (Expunge, Preempt); Impede (Contain); Expose (Detect)].
3.4.3e Employ automated discovery and management tools to maintain an up-to-date, complete,
accurate, and readily available inventory of system components.
DISCUSSION
The system component inventory includes system-specific information required for component
accountability and to provide support to identify, control, monitor, and verify configuration items
in accordance with the authoritative source. The information necessary for effective accountability
of system components includes the system name, hardware and software component owners,
hardware inventory specifications, software license information, software version numbers, and—
for networked components—the machine names and network addresses. Inventory specifications
include the manufacturer, supplier information, component type, date of receipt, cost, model,
serial number, and physical location. Organizations also use automated mechanisms to implement
and maintain authoritative (i.e., up-to-date, complete, accurate, and available) baseline
configurations for systems that include hardware and software inventory tools, configuration
management tools, and network management tools. Tools can be used to track version numbers
on operating systems, applications, types of software installed, and current patch levels.
PROTECTION STRATEGY
Penetration-Resistant Architecture.
ADVERSARY EFFECTS
See [SP 800-160-2]: [Expose (Detect)].
3.5 IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION
Enhanced Security Requirements
3.5.1e Identify and authenticate [Assignment: organization-defined systems and system components]
before establishing a network connection using bidirectional authentication that is
cryptographically based and replay resistant.
DISCUSSION
Cryptographically-based and replay-resistant authentication between systems, components, and
devices addresses the risk of unauthorized access from spoofing (i.e., claiming a false identity). The
requirement applies to client-server authentication, server-server authentication, and device
authentication (including mobile devices). The cryptographic key for authentication transactions is
stored in suitably secure storage available to the authenticator application (e.g., keychain storage,
Trusted Platform Module [TPM], Trusted Execution Environment [TEE], or secure element).
Mandating authentication requirements at every connection point may not be practical, and
therefore, such requirements may only be applied periodically or at the initial point of network
connection.
[SP 800-63-3] provides guidance on identity and authenticator management.
PROTECTION STRATEGY
Penetration-Resistant Architecture.
ADVERSARY EFFECTS
See [SP 800-160-2]: [Preclude (Negate); Expose (Detect)].
3.5.2e Employ automated mechanisms for the generation, protection, rotation, and management of
passwords for systems and system components that do not support multifactor authentication
or complex account management.
DISCUSSION
In situations where static passwords or personal identification numbers (PIN) are used (e.g., certain
system components do not support multifactor authentication or complex account management,
such as separate system accounts for each user and logging), automated mechanisms (e.g.,
password managers) can automatically generate, rotate, manage, and store strong and different
passwords for users and device accounts. For example, a router might have one administrator
account, but an organization typically has multiple network administrators. Therefore, access
management and accountability are problematic. A password manager uses techniques such as
automated password rotation (in this example, for the router password) to allow a specific user to
temporarily gain access to a device by checking out a temporary password and then checking the
password back in to end the access. The password manager simultaneously logs these actions. One
of the risks in using password managers is that an adversary may target the collection of passwords
that the device generates. Therefore, it is important that these passwords are secured. Methods
for protecting passwords include the use of multi-factor authentication to the password manager,
encryption, or secured hardware (e.g., a hardware security module).
[SP 800-63-3] provides guidance on password generation and management.
PROTECTION STRATEGY
Penetration-Resistant Architecture.
ADVERSARY EFFECTS
See [SP 800-160-2]: [Impede (Delay, Exert)].
3.5.3e Employ automated or manual/procedural mechanisms to prohibit system components from
connecting to organizational systems unless the components are known, authenticated, in a
properly configured state, or in a trust profile.
DISCUSSION
Identification and authentication of system components and component configurations can be
determined, for example, via a cryptographic hash of the component. This is also known as device
attestation and known operating state or trust profile. A trust profile based on factors such as the
user, authentication method, device type, and physical location is used to make dynamic decisions
on authorizations to data of varying types. If device attestation is the means of identification and
authentication, then it is important that patches and updates to the device are handled via a
configuration management process such that the patches and updates are done securely and do
not disrupt the identification and authentication of other devices.
[IR 8011-1] provides guidance on using automation support to assess system configurations.
PROTECTION STRATEGY
Penetration-Resistant Architecture.
ADVERSARY EFFECTS
See [SP 800-160-2]: [Preclude (Preempt); Expose (Detect)].
3.6 INCIDENT RESPONSE
Enhanced Security Requirements
3.6.1e Establish and maintain a security operations center capability that operates [Assignment:
organization-defined time period].
DISCUSSION
A security operations center (SOC) is the focal point for security operations and computer network
defense for an organization. The purpose of the SOC is to defend and monitor an organization's
systems and networks (i.e., cyber infrastructure) on an ongoing basis. The SOC is also responsible
for detecting, analyzing, and responding to cybersecurity incidents in a timely manner. The SOC is
staffed with skilled technical and operational personnel (e.g., security analysts, incident response
personnel, systems security engineers); in some instances operates 24 hours per day, seven days
per week; and implements technical, management, and operational controls (e.g., monitoring,
scanning, and forensics tools) to monitor, fuse, correlate, analyze, and respond to security-relevant
event data from multiple sources. Sources of event data include perimeter defenses, network
devices (e.g., gateways, routers, and switches), and endpoint agent data feeds. The SOC provides
a holistic situational awareness capability to help organizations determine the security posture of
the system and organization. An SOC capability can be obtained in many ways. Larger organizations
may implement a dedicated SOC while smaller organizations may employ third-party organizations
to provide such a capability.
[SP 800-61] provides guidance on incident handling. [SP 800-86] and [SP 800-101] provide guidance
on integrating forensic techniques into incident response. [SP 800-150] provides guidance on cyber
threat information sharing. [SP 800-184] provides guidance on cybersecurity event recovery.
PROTECTION STRATEGY
Damage-Limiting Operations.
ADVERSARY EFFECTS
See [SP 800-160-2]: [Limit (Shorten, Reduce); Expose (Detect)].
3.6.2e Establish and maintain a cyber incident response team that can be deployed by the
organization within [Assignment: organization-defined time period].
DISCUSSION
A cyber incident response team (CIRT) is a team of experts that assesses, documents, and responds
to cyber incidents so that organizational systems can recover quickly and implement the necessary
controls to avoid future incidents. CIRT personnel include, for example, forensic analysts, malicious
code analysts, systems security engineers, and real-time operations personnel. The incident
handling capability includes performing rapid forensic preservation of evidence and analysis of and
response to intrusions. The team members may or may not be full-time but need to be available
to respond in the time period required. The size and specialties of the team are based on known
and anticipated threats. The team is typically pre-equipped with the software and hardware (e.g.,
forensic tools) necessary for rapid identification, quarantine, mitigation, and recovery and is
familiar with how to preserve evidence and maintain chain of custody for law enforcement or
counterintelligence uses. For some organizations, the CIRT can be implemented as a cross-organizational entity or as part of the Security Operations Center (SOC).
[SP 800-61] provides guidance on incident handling. [SP 800-86] and [SP 800-101] provide guidance
on integrating forensic techniques into incident response. [SP 800-150] provides guidance on cyber
threat information sharing. [SP 800-184] provides guidance on cybersecurity event recovery.
PROTECTION STRATEGY
Damage-Limiting Operations.
ADVERSARY EFFECTS
See [SP 800-160-2]: [Preclude (Expunge); Impede (Contain, Exert); Limit (Shorten, Reduce);
Expose (Scrutinize)].
3.7 MAINTENANCE
Enhanced Security Requirements
There are no enhanced security requirements for maintenance.
3.8 MEDIA PROTECTION
Enhanced Security Requirements
There are no enhanced security requirements for media protection.
3.9 PERSONNEL SECURITY
Enhanced Security Requirements
3.9.1e Conduct [Assignment: organization-defined enhanced personnel screening] for individuals and
reassess individual positions and access to CUI [Assignment: organization-defined frequency].
DISCUSSION
Personnel security is the discipline that provides a trusted workforce based on an evaluation or
assessment of conduct, integrity, judgment, loyalty, reliability, and stability. The extent of the
vetting is commensurate with the level of risk that individuals could bring about by their position
and access to CUI. For individuals accessing Federal Government facilities and systems, the Federal
Government employs resources, information, and technology in its vetting processes to ensure a
trusted workforce. These screening processes may be extended all or in part to persons accessing
federal information, including CUI that is resident in nonfederal systems and organizations through 
contractual vehicles or other agreements established between federal agencies and nonfederal
organizations.
Examples of enhanced personnel screening for security purposes include additional background
checks. Personnel reassessment activities reflect applicable laws, executive orders, directives,
policies, regulations, and specific criteria established for the level of access required for assigned
positions.
PROTECTION STRATEGY
Damage-Limiting Operations.
ADVERSARY EFFECTS
See [SP 800-160-2]: [Preclude (Expunge); Impede (Exert)].
3.9.2e Ensure that organizational systems are protected if adverse information develops or is
obtained about individuals with access to CUI.
DISCUSSION
If adverse information develops or is obtained about an individual with access to CUI which calls
into question whether the individual should have continued access to systems containing CUI,
actions are taken (e.g., preclude or limit further access by the individual, audit actions taken by the
individual) to protect the CUI while the adverse information is resolved.
PROTECTION STRATEGY
Damage-Limiting Operations.
ADVERSARY EFFECTS
See [SP 800-160-2]: [Limit (Reduce)].
3.10 PHYSICAL PROTECTION
Enhanced Security Requirements
There are no enhanced security requirements for physical protection.
3.11 RISK ASSESSMENT
Enhanced Security Requirements
3.11.1e Employ [Assignment: organization-defined sources of threat intelligence] as part of a risk
assessment to guide and inform the development of organizational systems, security
architectures, selection of security solutions, monitoring, threat hunting, and response and
recovery activities.
DISCUSSION
The constant evolution and increased sophistication of adversaries, especially the APT, makes it
more likely that adversaries can successfully compromise or breach organizational systems.
Accordingly, threat intelligence can be integrated into each step of the risk management process
throughout the system development life cycle. This risk management process includes defining
system security requirements, developing system and security architectures, selecting security
solutions, monitoring (including threat hunting), and remediation efforts.
[SP 800-30] provides guidance on risk assessments. [SP 800-39] provides guidance on the risk
management process. [SP 800-160-1] provides guidance on security architectures and systems
security engineering. [SP 800-150] provides guidance on cyber threat information sharing.
PROTECTION STRATEGY
Damage-Limiting Operations.
ADVERSARY EFFECTS
See [SP 800-160-2]: [Preclude (Negate); Impede (Exert); Expose (Detect)].
3.11.2e Conduct cyber threat hunting activities [Selection (one or more): [Assignment: organizationdefined frequency]; [Assignment: organization-defined event]] to search for indicators of
compromise in [Assignment: organization-defined systems] and detect, track, and disrupt
threats that evade existing controls.
DISCUSSION
Threat hunting is an active means of defense that contrasts with traditional protection measures,
such as firewalls, intrusion detection and prevention systems, quarantining malicious code in
sandboxes, and Security Information and Event Management (SIEM) technologies and systems.
Cyber threat hunting involves proactively searching organizational systems, networks, and
infrastructure for advanced threats. The objective is to track and disrupt cyber adversaries as early
as possible in the attack sequence and to measurably improve the speed and accuracy of
organizational responses. Indicators of compromise are forensic artifacts from intrusions that are
identified on organizational systems at the host or network level and can include unusual network
traffic, unusual file changes, and the presence of malicious code.
Threat hunting teams use existing threat intelligence and may create new threat information,
which may be shared with peer organizations, Information Sharing and Analysis Organizations
(ISAO), Information Sharing and Analysis Centers (ISAC), and relevant government departments
and agencies. Threat indicators, signatures, tactics, techniques, procedures, and other indicators
of compromise may be available via government and non-government cooperatives, including
Forum of Incident Response and Security Teams, United States Computer Emergency Response
Team, Defense Industrial Base Cybersecurity Information Sharing Program, and CERT Coordination
Center.
[SP 800-30] provides guidance on threat and risk assessments, risk analyses, and risk modeling. [SP
800-160-2] provides guidance on systems security engineering and cyber resiliency. [SP 800-150]
provides guidance on cyber threat information sharing.
PROTECTION STRATEGY
Damage-Limiting Operations.
ADVERSARY EFFECTS
See [SP 800-160-2]: [Preclude (Expunge); Limit (Shorten, Reduce); Expose (Detect, Scrutinize)].
3.11.3e Employ advanced automation and analytics capabilities in support of analysts to predict and
identify risks to organizations, systems, and system components.
DISCUSSION
A properly resourced Security Operations Center (SOC) or Computer Incident Response Team
(CIRT) may be overwhelmed by the volume of information generated by the proliferation of
security tools and appliances unless it employs advanced automation and analytics to analyze the
data. Advanced automation and predictive analytics capabilities are typically supported by artificial
intelligence concepts and machine learning. Examples include Automated Workflow Operations,
Automated Threat Discovery and Response (which includes broad-based collection, context-based
analysis, and adaptive response capabilities), and machine-assisted decision tools.
[SP 800-30] provides guidance on risk assessments and risk analyses.
PROTECTION STRATEGY
Damage-Limiting Operations.
ADVERSARY EFFECTS
See [SP 800-160-2]: No direct effects.
3.11.4e Document or reference in the system security plan the security solution selected, the rationale
for the security solution, and the risk determination.
DISCUSSION
System security plans relate security requirements to a set of security controls and solutions. The
plans describe how the controls and solutions meet the security requirements. For the enhanced
security requirements selected when the APT is a concern, the security plan provides traceability
between threat and risk assessments and the risk-based selection of a security solution, including
discussion of relevant analyses of alternatives and rationale for key security-relevant architectural
and design decisions. This level of detail is important as the threat changes, requiring reassessment
of the risk and the basis for previous security decisions.
When incorporating external service providers into the system security plan, organizations state
the type of service provided (e.g., software as a service, platform as a service), the point and type
of connections(including ports and protocols), the nature and type of the information flows to and
from the service provider, and the security controls implemented by the service provider. For
safety critical systems, organizations document situations for which safety is the primary reason
for not implementing a security solution (i.e., the solution is appropriate to address the threat but
causes a safety concern).
[SP 800-18] provides guidance on the development of system security plans.
PROTECTION STRATEGY
Penetration-Resistant Architecture.
ADVERSARY EFFECTS
See [SP 800-160-2]: No direct effects.
3.11.5e Assess the effectiveness of security solutions [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] to
address anticipated risk to organizational systems and the organization based on current and
accumulated threat intelligence.
DISCUSSION
Threat awareness and risk assessment of the organization are dynamic, continuous, and inform
system operations, security requirements for the system, and the security solutions employed to
meet those requirements. Threat intelligence (i.e., threat information that has been aggregated,
transformed, analyzed, interpreted, or enriched to help provide the necessary context for decision-making) is infused into the risk assessment processes and information security operations of the
organization to identify any changes required to address the dynamic threat environment.
[SP 800-30] provides guidance on risk assessments, threat assessments, and risk analyses.
PROTECTION STRATEGY
Damage-Limiting Operations.
ADVERSARY EFFECTS
See [SP 800-160-2]: [Expose (Scrutinize)].
3.11.6e Assess, respond to, and monitor supply chain risks associated with organizational systems and
system components.
DISCUSSION
Supply chain events include disruption, use of defective components, insertion of counterfeits,
theft, malicious development practices, improper delivery practices, and insertion of malicious
code. These events can have a significant impact on a system and its information and, therefore,
can also adversely impact organizational operations (i.e., mission, functions, image, or reputation),
organizational assets, individuals, other organizations, and the Nation. The supply chain-related
events may be unintentional or malicious and can occur at any point during the system life cycle.
An analysis of supply chain risk can help an organization identify systems or components for which
additional supply chain risk mitigations are required.
[SP 800-30] provides guidance on risk assessments, threat assessments, and risk analyses. [SP 800-
161] provides guidance on supply chain risk management.
PROTECTION STRATEGY
Penetration-Resistant Architecture.
ADVERSARY EFFECTS
See [SP 800-160-2]: [Preclude (Preempt); Expose (Detect)].
3.11.7e Develop a plan for managing supply chain risks associated with organizational systems and
system components; update the plan [Assignment: organization-defined frequency].
DISCUSSION
The growing dependence on products, systems, and services from external providers, along with
the nature of the relationships with those providers, present an increasing level of risk to an
organization. Threat actions that may increase risk include the insertion or use of counterfeits,
unauthorized production, tampering, theft, insertion of malicious software and hardware, and
poor manufacturing and development practices in the supply chain. Supply chain risks can be
endemic or systemic within a system element or component, a system, an organization, a sector,
or the Nation. Managing supply chain risk is a multifaceted undertaking that requires a coordinated
effort across an organization to build trust relationships and communicate with both internal and
external stakeholders. Supply chain risk management (SCRM) activities involve identifying and
assessing risks, determining appropriate mitigating actions, developing SCRM plans to document
selected mitigating actions, and monitoring performance against plans. SCRM plans address
requirements for developing trustworthy, secure, and resilient systems and system components,
including the application of the security design principles implemented as part of life cycle-based
systems security engineering processes.
[SP 800-161] provides guidance on supply chain risk management.
PROTECTION STRATEGY
Penetration-Resistant Architecture.
ADVERSARY EFFECTS
See [SP 800-160-2]: [Preclude (Preempt); Impede (Exert)].
3.12 SECURITY ASSESSMENT
Enhanced Security Requirements
3.12.1e Conduct penetration testing [Assignment: organization-defined frequency], leveraging
automated scanning tools and ad hoc tests using subject matter experts.
DISCUSSION
Penetration testing is a specialized type of assessment conducted on systems or individual system
components to identify vulnerabilities that could be exploited by adversaries. Penetration testing
goes beyond automated vulnerability scanning. It is conducted by penetration testing agents and 
teams with particular skills and experience that include technical expertise in network, operating
system, and application-level security. Penetration testing can be used to validate vulnerabilities
or determine a system's penetration resistance to adversaries within specified constraints. Such
constraints include time, resources, and skills. Organizations may also supplement penetration
testing with red team exercises. Red teams attempt to duplicate the actions of adversaries in
carrying out attacks against organizations and provide an in-depth analysis of security-related
weaknesses or deficiencies.
Organizations can use the results of vulnerability analyses to support penetration testing activities.
Penetration testing can be conducted internally or externally on the hardware, software, or
firmware components of a system and can exercise both physical and technical controls. A
standard method for penetration testing includes pretest analysis based on full knowledge of the
system, pretest identification of potential vulnerabilities based on the pretest analysis, and testing
designed to determine the exploitability of vulnerabilities. All parties agree to the specified rules
of engagement before the commencement of penetration testing. Organizations correlate the
rules of engagement for penetration tests and red teaming exercises (if used) with the tools,
techniques, and procedures that they anticipate adversaries may employ. The penetration testing
or red team exercises may be organization-based or external to the organization. In either case, it
is important that the team possesses the necessary skills and resources to do the job and is
objective in its assessment.
[SP 800-53A] provides guidance on conducting security assessments.
PROTECTION STRATEGY
Penetration-Resistant Architecture; Damage-Limiting Operations.
ADVERSARY EFFECTS
See [SP 800-160-2]: [Impede (Exert); Expose (Detect)].
3.13 SYSTEM AND COMMUNICATIONS PROTECTION
Enhanced Security Requirements
3.13.1e Create diversity in [Assignment: organization-defined system components] to reduce the
extent of malicious code propagation.
DISCUSSION
Organizations often use homogenous information technology environments to reduce costs and
to simplify administration and use. However, a homogenous environment can also facilitate the
work of the APT, as it allows for common mode failures and the propagation of malicious code
across identical system components (i.e., hardware, software, and firmware). In these
environments, adversary tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTP) that work on one instantiation
of a system component will work equally well on other identical instantiations of the component
regardless of how many times such components are replicated or how far away they may be placed
in the architecture. Increasing diversity within organizational systems reduces the impact of
potential exploitations or compromises of specific technologies. Such diversity protects against
common mode failures, including those failures induced by supply chain attacks. Diversity also
reduces the likelihood that the TTP adversaries use to compromise one system component will be
effective against other system components, thus increasing the adversary's work factor to
successfully complete the planned attacks. A heterogeneous or diverse information technology
environment makes the task of propagating malicious code more difficult, as the adversary needs
to develop and deploy different TTP for the diverse components.
Satisfying this requirement does not mean that organizations need to acquire and manage multiple
versions of operating systems, applications, tools, and communication protocols. However, the use 
of diversity in certain critical, organizationally determined system components can be an effective
countermeasure against the APT. In addition, organizations may already be practicing diversity,
although not to counter the APT. For example, it is common for organizations to employ diverse
anti-virus products at different parts of their infrastructure simply because each vendor may issue
updates to new malicious code patterns at different times and frequencies. Similarly, some
organizations employ products from one vendor at the server level and products from another
vendor at the end-user level. Another example of diversity occurs in products that provide address
space layout randomization (ASLR). Such products introduce a form of synthetic diversity by
transforming the implementations of common software to produce a variety of instances. Finally,
organizations may choose to use multiple virtual private network (VPN) vendors, tunneling one
vendor's VPN within another vendor's VPN. Smaller organizations may find that achieving diversity
in system components is challenging and perhaps not practical. Organizations also consider the
vulnerabilities that may be introduced into the system by the employment of diverse system
components.
[SP 800-160-1] provides guidance on security engineering practices and security design concepts.
[SP 800-160-2] provides guidance on developing cyber resilient systems and system components.
[SP 800-161] provides guidance on supply chain risk management.
PROTECTION STRATEGY
Designing for Cyber Resiliency and Survivability.
ADVERSARY EFFECTS
See [SP 800-160-2]: [Redirect (Deter); Preclude (Preempt); Impede (Contain, Degrade, Delay,
Exert); Limit (Shorten, Reduce)].
3.13.2e Implement the following changes to organizational systems and system components to
introduce a degree of unpredictability into operations: [Assignment: organization-defined
changes and frequency of changes by system and system component].
DISCUSSION
Cyber-attacks by adversaries are predicated on the assumption of a certain degree of predictability
and consistency regarding the attack surface. The attack surface is the set of points on the
boundary of a system, a system element, or an environment where an attacker can try to enter,
cause an effect on, or extract data from the system, system element, or environment. Changes to
the attack surface reduce the predictability of the environment, making it difficult for adversaries
to plan and carry out attacks, and can cause the adversaries to make miscalculations that can either
impact the overall effectiveness of the attacks or increase the observability of the attackers.
Unpredictability can be achieved by making changes in seemingly random times or circumstances
(e.g., by randomly shortening the time when the credentials are valid). Randomness introduces
increased levels of uncertainty for adversaries regarding the actions that organizations take to
defend their systems against attacks. Such actions may impede the ability of adversaries to
correctly target system components that support critical or essential organizational missions or
business functions. Uncertainty may also cause adversaries to hesitate before initiating attacks or
continuing attacks. Techniques involving randomness include performing certain routine actions
at different times of day, employing different information technologies, using different suppliers,
and rotating the roles and responsibilities of organizational personnel.
PROTECTION STRATEGY
Designing for Cyber Resiliency and Survivability.
ADVERSARY EFFECTS
See [SP 800-160-2]: [Preclude (Preempt, Negate); Impede (Delay, Exert); Expose (Detect)].
3.13.3e Employ [Assignment: organization-defined technical and procedural means] to confuse and
mislead adversaries.
DISCUSSION
There are many techniques and approaches that can be used to confuse and mislead adversaries,
including misdirection, tainting, disinformation, or a combination thereof. Deception is used to
confuse and mislead adversaries regarding the information that the adversaries use for decision-making, the value and authenticity of the information that the adversaries attempt to exfiltrate,
or the environment in which the adversaries desire or need to operate. Such actions can impede
the adversary's ability to conduct meaningful reconnaissance of the targeted organization, delay
or degrade an adversary's ability to move laterally through a system or from one system to another
system, divert the adversary away from systems or system components containing CUI, and
increase observability of the adversary to the defender—revealing the presence of the adversary
along with its TTPs. Misdirection can be achieved through deception environments (e.g., deception
nets), which provide virtual sandboxes into which malicious code can be diverted and adversary
TTP can be safely examined. Tainting involves embedding data or information in an organizational
system or system component which the organization desires adversaries to exfiltrate. Tainting
allows organizations to determine that information has been exfiltrated or improperly removed
from the organization and potentially provides the organization with information regarding the
nature of exfiltration or adversary locations. Disinformation can be achieved by making false
information intentionally available to adversaries regarding the state of the system or type of
organizational defenses. Any disinformation activity is coordinated with the associated federal
agency requiring such activity, and should include a plan to limit incidental exposure of the false
CUI to authorized users. Disinformation can be employed both tactically (e.g., making available
false credentials that the defender can use to track adversary actions) and strategically (e.g.,
interspersing false CUI with actual CUI, interfering with an adversary's re-use, reverse engineering
and exploitation of legitimate CUI, thus undermining the adversary's confidence in the value of the
exfiltrated information, and subsequently causing them to limit such exfiltration).
[SP 800-160-2] provides guidance on developing cyber resilient systems and system components.
PROTECTION STRATEGY
Designing for Cyber Resiliency and Survivability.
ADVERSARY EFFECTS
See [SP 800-160-2]: [Redirect (Deter, Divert, Deceive); Preclude (Preempt, Negate); Impede
(Delay, Exert); Expose (Detect)].
3.13.4e Employ [Selection: (one or more): [Assignment: organization-defined physical isolation
techniques]; [Assignment: organization-defined logical isolation techniques]] in organizational
systems and system components.
DISCUSSION
A mix of physical and logical isolation techniques (described below) implemented as part of the
system architecture can limit the unauthorized flow of CUI, reduce the system attack surface,
constrain the number of system components that must be secure, and impede the movement of
an adversary. When implemented with a set of managed interfaces, physical and logical isolation
techniques for organizational systems and components can isolate CUI into separate security
domains where additional protections can be implemented. Any communications across the
managed interfaces (i.e., across security domains), including for management or administrative
purposes, constitutes remote access even if the communications remain within the organization.
Separating system components with boundary protection mechanisms allows for the increased
protection of individual components and more effective control of information flows between
those components. This enhanced protection limits the potential harm from and susceptibility to
hostile cyber-attacks and errors. The degree of isolation can vary depending on the boundary
protection mechanisms selected. Boundary protection mechanisms include routers, gateways, and
firewalls separating system components into physically separate networks or subnetworks;
virtualization and micro-virtualization techniques; encrypting information flows among system
components using distinct encryption keys; cross-domain devices separating subnetworks; and
complete physical separation (i.e., air gaps).
System architectures include logical isolation, partial physical and logical isolation, or complete
physical isolation between subsystems and at system boundaries between resources that store,
process, transmit, or protect CUI and other resources. Examples include:
• Logical isolation: Data tagging, digital rights management (DRM), and data loss prevention
(DLP) that tags, monitors, and restricts the flow of CUI; virtual machines or containers that
separate CUI and other information on hosts; and virtual local area networks (VLAN) that keep
CUI and other information separate on networks.
• Partial physical and logical isolation: Physically or cryptographically isolated networks,
dedicated hardware in data centers, and secure clients that (a) may not directly access
resources outside of the domain (i.e., all applications with cross-enclave connectivity execute
as remote virtual applications hosted in a demilitarized zone [DMZ] or internal and protected
enclave), (b) access via remote virtualized applications or virtual desktop with no file transfer
capability other than with dual authorization, or (c) employ dedicated client hardware (e.g., a
zero or thin client) or hardware approved for multi-level secure (MLS) usage.
• Complete physical isolation: Dedicated (not shared) client and server hardware; physically
isolated, stand-alone enclaves for clients and servers; and (a) logically separate network traffic
(e.g., using a VLAN) with end-to-end encryption using Public Key Infrastructure (PKI)-based
cryptography or (b) physical isolation from other networks.
Isolation techniques are selected based on a risk management perspective that balances the
threat, the information being protected, and the cost of the options for protection. Architectural
and design decisions are guided and informed by the security requirements and selected solutions.
Organizations consider the trustworthiness of the isolation techniques employed (e.g., the logical
isolation relies on information technology that could be considered a high value target because of
the function being performed), introducing its own set of vulnerabilities.
[SP 800-160-1] provides guidance on developing trustworthy, secure, and cyber resilient systems
using systems security engineering practices and security design concepts.
PROTECTION STRATEGY
Penetration-Resistant Architecture; Designing for Cyber Resiliency and Survivability.
ADVERSARY EFFECTS
See [SP 800-160-2]: [Preclude (Preempt, Negate); Impede (Contain, Degrade, Delay, Exert); Limit
(Reduce)].
3.13.5e Distribute and relocate the following system functions or resources [Assignment: organization-defined frequency]: [Assignment: organization-defined system functions or resources].
DISCUSSION
Changing processing and storage locations (also referred to as moving target defense) addresses
the APT by using techniques such as virtualization, distributed processing, and replication. This
enables organizations to relocate system components that support critical missions and business
functions. Changing the locations of processing activities or storage sites introduces a degree of
uncertainty into the targeting activities of adversaries. Targeting uncertainty increases the work
factor of adversaries making compromises or breaches to organizational systems more difficult 
and time-consuming. It also increases the chances that adversaries may inadvertently disclose
aspects of their tradecraft while attempting to locate organizational resources. Other options for
employing moving target defense include changing IP addresses, Domain Name System (DNS)
names, or network topologies. Moving target defense can also increase the work factor for
defenders who have a constantly changing system to defend. Accordingly, organizations update
their management and security tools and train personnel to adapt to the additional work factor.
Another way of addressing this requirement is by fragmentation. This involves taking information
and fragmenting/partitioning it across multiple components (e.g., across a distributed database).
Such actions mean that the compromise (unauthorized exfiltration) of any single component of
the information data set will not result in the compromise of the entire data. To fully compromise
the entire data set, the adversary would have to work harder to try to locate all of the data sets.
PROTECTION STRATEGY
Designing for Cyber Resiliency and Survivability.
ADVERSARY EFFECTS
See [SP 800-160-2]: [Preclude (Preempt, Negate); Impede (Delay, Exert); Expose (Detect)].
3.14 SYSTEM AND INFORMATION INTEGRITY
Enhanced Security Requirements
3.14.1e Verify the integrity of [Assignment: organization-defined security critical or essential software]
using root of trust mechanisms or cryptographic signatures.
DISCUSSION
Verifying the integrity of the organization's security-critical or essential software is an important
capability since corrupted software is the primary attack vector used by adversaries to undermine
or disrupt the proper functioning of organizational systems. There are many ways to verify
software integrity throughout the system development life cycle. Root of trust mechanisms (e.g.,
secure boot, trusted platform modules, Unified Extensible Firmware Interface [UEFI]), verify that
only trusted code is executed during boot processes. This capability helps system components
protect the integrity of boot firmware in organizational systems by verifying the integrity and
authenticity of updates to the firmware prior to applying changes to the system component and
preventing unauthorized processes from modifying the boot firmware. The employment of
cryptographic signatures ensures the integrity and authenticity of critical and essential software
that stores, processes, or transmits, CUI. Cryptographic signatures include digital signatures and
the computation and application of signed hashes using asymmetric cryptography, protecting the
confidentiality of the key used to generate the hash, and using the public key to verify the hash
information. Hardware roots of trust are considered to be more secure. This requirement supports
3.4.1e and 3.4.3.e.
[FIPS 140-3] provides security requirements for cryptographic modules. [FIPS 180-4] and [FIPS 202]
provide secure hash standards. [FIPS 186-4] provides a digital signature standard. [SP 800-147]
provides BIOS protection guidance. [NIST TRUST] provides guidance on the roots of trust project.
PROTECTION STRATEGY
Penetration-Resistant Architecture.
ADVERSARY EFFECTS
See [SP 800-160-2]: [Preclude (Negate); Impede (Exert); Expose (Detect)].
3.14.2e Monitor organizational systems and system components on an ongoing basis for anomalous or
suspicious behavior.
DISCUSSION
Monitoring is used to identify unusual, suspicious, or unauthorized activities or conditions related
to organizational systems and system components. Such activities or conditions can include
unusual internal systems communications traffic, unauthorized exporting of information,signaling
to external systems, large file transfers, long-time persistent connections, attempts to access
information from unexpected locations, unusual protocols and ports in use, and attempted
communications with suspected malicious external addresses.
The correlation of physical, time, or geolocation audit record information to the audit records from
systems may assist organizations in identifying examples of anomalous behavior. For example, the
correlation of an individual's identity for logical access to certain systems with the additional
information that the individual was not present at the facility when the logical access occurred is
indicative of anomalous behavior.
[SP 800-61] provides guidance on incident handling. [SP 800-83] provides guidance for malicious
code incident prevention and handling. [SP 800-92] provides guidance on computer security log
management. [SP 800-94] provides guidance on intrusion detection and prevention. [SP 800-137]
provides guidance on continuous monitoring of systems.
PROTECTION STRATEGY
Designing for Cyber Resiliency and Survivability.
ADVERSARY EFFECTS
See [SP 800-160-2]: [Expose (Detect)].
3.14.3e Ensure that [Assignment: organization-defined systems and system components] are included
in the scope of the specified enhanced security requirements or are segregated in purpose-specific networks.
DISCUSSION
Organizations may have a variety of systems and system components in their inventory, including
Information Technology (IT), Internet of Things (IoT), Operational Technology (OT), and Industrial
Internet of Things (IIoT). The convergence of IT, OT, IoT, and IIoT significantly increases the attack
surface of organizations and provides attack vectors that are challenging to address. Compromised
IoT, OT, and IIoT system components can serve as launching points for attacks on organizational IT
systems that handle CUI. Some IoT, OT, and IIoT system components can store, transmit, or process
CUI (e.g., specifications or parameters for objects manufactured in support of critical programs).
Most of the current generation of IoT, OT, and IIoT system components are not designed with
security as a foundational property and may not be able to be configured to support security
functionality. Connections to and from such system components are generally not encrypted, do
not provide the necessary authentication, are not monitored, and are not logged. Therefore, these
components pose a significant cyber threat. Gaps in IoT, OT, and IIoT security capabilities may be
addressed by employing intermediary system components that can provide encryption,
authentication, security scanning, and logging capabilities—thus, preventing the components from
being accessible from the Internet. However, such mitigation options are not always available or
practicable. The situation is further complicated because some of the IoT, OT, and IIoT devices may
be needed for essential missions and business functions. In those instances, it is necessary for such
devices to be isolated from the Internet to reduce the susceptibility to cyber-attacks.
[SP 800-160-1] provides guidance on security engineering practices and security design concepts.
PROTECTION STRATEGY
Penetration-Resistant Architecture.
ADVERSARY EFFECTS
See [SP 800-160-2]: [Preclude (Preempt, Negate); Impede (Contain, Degrade, Delay, Exert); Limit
(Reduce); Expose (Detect)].
3.14.4e Refresh [Assignment: organization-defined systems and system components] from a known,
trusted state [Assignment: organization-defined frequency].
DISCUSSION
This requirement mitigates risk from the APT by reducing the targeting capability of adversaries
(i.e., the window of opportunity for the attack). By implementing the concept of non-persistence
for selected system components, organizations can provide a known state computing resource for
a specific time period that does not give adversaries sufficient time to exploit vulnerabilities in
organizational systems and the environments in which those systems operate. Since the APT is a
high-end, sophisticated threat regarding capability, intent, and targeting, organizations assume
that over an extended period, a percentage of attacks will be successful. Non-persistent system
components and system services are activated as required using protected information and are
terminated periodically or at the end of sessions. Non-persistence increases the work factor of
adversaries attempting to compromise or breach systems.
Non-persistence can be achieved by refreshing system components (e.g., periodically reimaging
components or using a variety of common virtualization techniques). Non-persistent services can
be implemented using "Infrastructure as Code" to automatically build, configure, test, deploy, and
manage containers, virtual machines, or new instances of processes on physical machines (both
persistent or non-persistent). Periodic refreshes of system components and services do not require
organizations to determine whether compromises of components or services have occurred
(something that may often be difficult to determine). The refresh of selected system components
and services occurs with sufficient frequency to prevent the spread or intended impact of attacks
but not with such frequency that it makes the system unstable. Refreshes may be done periodically
to hinder the ability of adversaries to exploit optimum windows of vulnerabilities.
The reimaging of system components includes the reinstallation of firmware, operating systems,
and applications from a known, trusted source. Reimaging also includesthe installation of patches,
reapplication of configuration settings, and refresh of system or application data from a known,
trusted source.
PROTECTION STRATEGY
Penetration-Resistant Architecture.
ADVERSARY EFFECTS
See [SP 800-160-2]: [Preclude (Expunge, Preempt, Negate); Impede (Degrade, Delay, Exert); Limit
(Shorten, Reduce)].
3.14.5e Conduct reviews of persistent organizational storage locations [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] and remove CUI that is no longer needed.
DISCUSSION
As programs, projects, and contracts evolve, some CUI may no longer be needed. Periodic and
event-related (e.g., at project completion) reviews are conducted to ensure that CUI that is no
longer required is securely removed from persistent storage. Removal is consistent with federal
records retention policies and disposition schedules. Retaining information for longer than it is
needed makes the information a potential target for adversaries searching for critical program or
HVA information to exfiltrate. The unnecessary retention of system-related information provides
adversaries information that can assist in their reconnaissance and lateral movement through
organizational systems. Alternatively, information which must be retained but is not required for
current activities is removed from online storage and stored offline in a secure location to
eliminate the possibility of individuals gaining unauthorized access to the information through a 
network. The purging of CUI renders the information unreadable, indecipherable, and
unrecoverable.
[SP 800-88] provides guidance on media sanitization.
PROTECTION STRATEGY
Penetration-Resistant Architecture.
ADVERSARY EFFECTS
See [SP 800-160-2]: [Preclude (Expunge, Preempt, Negate); Impede (Degrade, Delay, Exert); Limit
(Shorten, Reduce)].
3.14.6e Use threat indicator information and effective mitigations obtained from [Assignment:
organization-defined external organizations] to guide and inform intrusion detection and
threat hunting.
DISCUSSION
Threat information related to specific threat events (e.g., TTPs, targets) that organizations have
experienced, threat mitigations that organizations have found to be effective against certain types
of threats, and threat intelligence (i.e., indications and warnings about threats that can occur) are
sourced from and shared with trusted organizations. This threat information can be used by
organizational Security Operations Centers (SOC) and incorporated into monitoring capabilities.
Threat information sharing includes threat indicators, signatures, and adversary TTPs from
organizations participating in threat-sharing consortia, government-commercial cooperatives, and
government-government cooperatives (e.g., CERTCC, CISA/US-CERT, FIRST, ISAO, DIB CS Program).
Unclassified indicators, based on classified information but which can be readily incorporated into
organizational intrusion detection systems, are available to qualified nonfederal organizations
from government sources.
PROTECTION STRATEGY
Damage-Limiting Operations.
ADVERSARY EFFECTS
See [SP 800-160-2]: [Expose (Detect, Scrutinize, Reveal)].
3.14.7e Verify the correctness of [Assignment: organization-defined security critical or essential
software, firmware, and hardware components] using [Assignment: organization-defined
verification methods or techniques].
DISCUSSION
Verification methods have varying degrees of rigor in determining the correctness of software,
firmware, and hardware components. For example, formal verification involves proving that a
software program satisfies some formal property or set of properties. The nature of formal
verification is generally time-consuming and not employed for commercial operating systems and
applications. Therefore, it would likely only be applied to some very limited uses, such as verifying
cryptographic protocols. However, in cases where software, firmware, or hardware components
exist with formal verification of the component's security properties, such components provide
greater assurance and trustworthiness and are preferred over similar components that have not
been formally verified.
[SP 800-160-1] provides guidance on developing trustworthy, secure, and cyber resilient systems
using systems security engineering practices and security design concepts.
PROTECTION STRATEGY
Penetration-Resistant Architecture.
ADVERSARY EFFECTS
See [SP 800-160-2]: [Preclude (Negate); Impede (Exert); Expose (Detect)].