EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Title III of the E-Government Act (Public Law 107-347), titled the Federal Information Security
Management Act (FISMA), tasked the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) to
develop:
• Standards to be used by all Federal agencies to categorize all information and information
systems collected or maintained by or on behalf of each agency based on the objectives
of providing appropriate levels of information security according to a range of risk levels;
• Guidelines recommending the types of information and information systems to be
included in each such category; and
• Minimum information security requirements (i.e., management, operational, and
technical security controls), for information and information systems in each such
category.
In response to the second of these tasks, this guideline has been developed to assist Federal
government agencies to categorize information and information systems. The guideline's
objective is to facilitate application of appropriate levels of information security according to a
range of levels of impact or consequences that might result from the unauthorized disclosure,
modification, or use of the information or information system. This guideline assumes that the
user is familiar with Standards for Security Categorization of Federal Information and
Information Systems (Federal Information Processing Standard [FIPS] 199). The guideline and
its appendices:
• Review the security categorization terms and definitions established by FIPS 199;
• Recommend a security categorization process;
• Describe a methodology for identifying types of Federal information and information
systems;
• Suggest provisional security impact levels for common information types;
• Discuss information attributes that may result in variances from the provisional impact
level assignment; and
• Describe how to establish a system security categorization based on the system's use,
connectivity, and aggregate information content.
This document is intended as a reference resource rather than as a tutorial and not all of the
material will be relevant to all agencies. This document includes two volumes, a basic guideline
and a volume of appendices. Users should review the guidelines provided in Volume I, then
refer to only that specific material from the appendices that applies to their own systems and
applications. The provisional impact assignments are provided in Volume II, Appendix C and D.
The basis employed in this guideline for the identification of information types is the Office of 
Management and Budget's Federal Enterprise Architecture (FEA) Program Management Office
(PMO) October 2007 publication, The Consolidated Reference Model Document Version 2.3. 
1.0 INTRODUCTION
The identification of information processed on an information system is essential to the proper
selection of security controls and ensuring the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of the
system and its information. The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Special
Publication (SP) 800-60 has been developed to assist Federal government agencies to categorize
information and information systems.
1.1 Purpose and Applicability
NIST SP 800-60 addresses the FISMA direction to develop guidelines recommending the types
of information and information systems to be included in each category of potential security
impact. This guideline is intended to help agencies consistently map security impact levels to
types of: (i) information (e.g., privacy, medical, proprietary, financial, contractor sensitive, trade
secret, investigation); and (ii) information systems (e.g., mission critical, mission support,
administrative). This guideline applies to all Federal information systems other than national
security systems. National security systems store, process, or communicate national security
information.
1.2 Target Audience
This publication is intended to serve a diverse federal audience of information system and
information security professionals including: (i) individuals with information system and
information security management and oversight responsibilities (e.g., chief information officers,
senior agency information security officers, authorizing officials); (ii) organizational officials
having a vested interest in the accomplishment of organizational missions (e.g., mission and
business area owners, information owners); (iii) individuals with information system
development responsibilities (e.g., program and project managers, information system
developers); and (iv) individuals with information security implementation and operational
responsibilities (e.g., information system owners, information owners, information system
security officers).
1.3 Relationship to Other Documents
NIST Special Publication (SP) 800-60 is a member of the NIST family of security-related
publications including:
• FIPS Publication 199, Standards for Security Categorization of Federal Information and
Information Systems;
• FIPS Publication 200, Minimum Security Requirements for Federal Information and
Information Systems; 
• NIST SP 800-30, Risk Management Guide for Information Technology Systems;
• NIST SP 800-37, Guide for the Security Certification and Accreditation of Federal
Information Systems;
• NIST Draft SP 800-39, Managing Risk from Information Systems: An Organization
Perspective;
• NIST SP 800-53, Recommended Security Controls for Federal Information Systems;
• NIST SP 800-53A, Guide for Assessing the Security Controls in Federal Information
Systems; and
• NIST SP 800-59, Guideline for Identifying an Information System as a National Security
System.
This series of nine documents is intended to provide a structured, yet flexible framework for
selecting, specifying, employing, evaluating, and monitoring the security controls in Federal
information systems—and thus, makes a significant contribution toward satisfying the
requirements of the Federal Information Security Management Act (FISMA) of 2002. While the
publications are mutually reinforcing and have some dependencies, in most cases, they can be
effectively used independently of one another.
The SP 800-60 information types and associated security impact levels are based on the Office of
Management and Budget (OMB) Federal Enterprise Architecture Program Management Office's
October 2007 FEA Consolidated Reference Model Document, Version 2.3, inputs from
participants in previous NIST SP 800-60 workshops, and FIPS 199. Rationale for the example
impact-level recommendations provided in the appendices has been derived from multiple
sources and, as such, will require several iterations of review, comment, and subsequent
modification to achieve consistency in terminology, structure, and content.
1.4 Organization of this Special Publication
This is Volume I of two volumes. It contains the basic guidelines for mapping types of
information and information systems to security categories. The appendices, including security
categorization recommendations for mission-based information types and rationale for security
categorization recommendations, are published as a separate Volume II.
Volume I provides the following background information and mapping guidelines:
• Section 2: Provides an overview of the value of the categorization process to agency
missions, security programs and overall information technology (IT) management and the
publication's role in the system development lifecycle, the certification and accreditation
process, and the NIST Risk Management Framework.
• Section 3: Provides the security objectives and corresponding security impact levels
identified in the Federal Information Processing Standard 199, Standards for Security
Categorization of Federal Information and Information Systems [FIPS 199]; 
• Section 4: Identifies the process including guidelines for identification of mission-based
and management and support information types and the process used to select security
impact levels, general considerations relating to security impact assignment, guidelines
for system security categorization, and considerations and guidelines for applying and
interrelating system categorization results to the agency's enterprise, large supporting
infrastructures, and interconnecting systems;
• Appendix A: Glossary; and
• Appendix B: References.
Volume II includes the following appendices:
• Appendix A: Glossary [Repeated];
• Appendix B: References [Repeated];
• Appendix C: Provisional security impact level assignments and supporting rationale
for management and support information (administrative, management, and service
information);
• Appendix D: Provisional security impact level assignments and supporting rationale
for mission-based information (mission information and services delivery
mechanisms); and
• Appendix E: Legislative and executive sources that specify sensitivity/criticality
properties. 
2.0 PUBLICATION OVERVIEW
Security categorization provides a vital step in integrating security into the government agency's
business and information technology management functions and establishes the foundation for
security standardization amongst their information systems. Security categorization starts with
the identification of what information supports which government lines of business, as defined
by the Federal Enterprise Architecture (FEA). Subsequent steps focus on the evaluation of the
need for security in terms of confidentiality, integrity, and availability. The result is strong
linkage between missions, information, and information systems with cost effective information
security.
2.1 Agencies Support the Security Categorization Process
Agencies support the categorization process by establishing mission-based information types for
the organization. The approach to establishing mission-based information types at an agency
begins by documenting the agency's mission and business areas. In the case of mission-based
information, the responsible individuals, in coordination with management, operational,
enterprise architecture, and security stakeholders, should compile a comprehensive set of the
agency's lines of business and mission areas. In addition, responsible individuals should identify
the applicable sub-functions necessary to accomplish the organization's mission. For example,
one organization's mission might be related to economic development. Sub-functions that are
part of the organization's economic development mission might include business and industry
development, intellectual property protection, or financial sector oversight. Each of these sub-functions represents an information type.
Agencies should conduct FIPS 199 security categorizations of their information systems as an
agency-wide activity with the involvement of the senior leadership and other key officials within
the organization (e.g., mission and business owners, authorizing officials, risk executive, chief
information officer, senior agency information security officer, information system owners, and
information owners) to ensure that each information system receives the appropriate
management oversight and reflects the needs of the organization as a whole. Senior leadership
oversight in the security categorization process is essential so that the next steps in the NIST
Risk Management Framework (e.g., security control selection) can be carried out in an effective
and consistent manner throughout the agency.
2.2 Value to Agency Missions, Security Programs and IT Management
Federal agencies are heavily dependent upon information and information systems to
successfully conduct critical missions. With an increasing reliability on and growing complexity
of information systems as well as a constantly changing risk environment, information security
has become a mission-essential function. This function must be conducted in a manner that
reduces the risks to the information entrusted to the agency, its overall mission, and its ability to
do business and to serve the American public. In the end, information security, as a function,
becomes a business enabler through diligent and effective management of risk to information
confidentiality, integrity, and availability. 
Therefore, the value of information security categorization is to enable agencies to proactively
implement appropriate information security controls based on the assessed potential impact to
information confidentiality, integrity, and availability and in turn to support their mission in a
cost-effective manner. An incorrect information system impact analysis (i.e., incorrect FIPS 199
security categorization) can result in the agency either over protecting the information system
thus wasting valuable security resources, or under protecting the information system and placing
important operations and assets at risk. The aggregation of such mistakes at the enterprise level
can further compound the problem.
In contrast, conducting FIPS 199 impact analyses as an agency-wide exercise with the
participation of key officials (e.g., Chief Information Officer [CIO], Senior Agency Information
Security Officer [SAISO], Authorizing Officials, Mission/System Owners) at multiple levels can
enable the agency to leverage economies of scale through the effective management and
implementation of security controls at the enterprise level. A resulting value of consistently
implementing this systematic process for determining the security categorization and the
application of appropriate security protection is an improved overall understanding of the
agency's mission, business processes, and information and system ownership.
Implementation Tip
To enable an appropriate level of mission support and the diligent
implementation of current and future information security requirements,
each agency should establish a formal process to validate system level
security categorizations in terms of agency priorities. This will not only
promote comparable evaluation of systems, but also yield added benefits to
include leveraging common security controls and establishing defense-indepth.
2.3 Role in the System Development Lifecycle
An initial security categorization should occur early in the agency's system development
lifecycle (SDLC). The resulting security categorization would feed into security requirements
identification (later to evolve into security controls) and other related activities such as privacy
impact analysis or critical infrastructure analysis. Ultimately, the identified security requirements
and selected security controls are introduced to the standard systems engineering process to
effectively integrate the security controls with the information systems functional and
operational requirements, as well as other pertinent system requirements (e.g., reliability,
maintainability, supportability).
2.4 Role in the Certification and Accreditation Process
Security categorization establishes the foundation of the certification and accreditation (C&A)
activity by determining the levels of rigor required for certification and overall assurance testing
of security controls, as well as additional activities that may be needed (i.e., privacy and critical
infrastructure protection (CIP)). Thus, it assists in determining C&A level of effort and
associated activity duration. 
Security categorization is a prerequisite activity for the C&A process. The categorization should
be revisited at least every three years or when significant change occurs to the system or
supporting business lines. Situational changes outside the system or agency may require a
reevaluation of the categorization (i.e., directed mission changes, changes in governance,
elevated or targeted threat activities). For more information, see NIST SP 800-64, Security
Considerations in the Information System Development Life Cycle and NIST SP 800-37, Guide
for the Security Certification and Accreditation of Federal Information Systems.
Implementation Tip
It is important to routinely revisit the security categorization as the
mission/ business changes because it is likely the impact levels or even
information types may change as well.
2.5 Role in the NIST Risk Management Framework
Security Categorization is the key first step in the Risk Management Framework because of its
effect on all other steps in the framework from selection of security controls to level of effort in
assessing security control effectiveness.
Figure 1, NIST Risk Management Framework, depicts the role of NIST security standards and
guidelines for information system security. 
The security categorization process documented in this publication provides input into the
following processes:
• Step 2: Select an initial set of security controls for the information system based on the
FIPS 199 security categorization and apply tailoring guidance as appropriate, to obtain a
starting point for required controls as specified in FIPS 200, Minimum Security
Requirements for Federal Information and Information Systems and NIST SP 800-53,
Recommended Security Controls for Federal Information Systems. Utilizing NIST SP
800-53 and SP 800-30, Risk Management Guide for Information Technology Systems,
supplement the initial set of tailored security controls based on an assessment of risk and
local conditions including organization-specific security requirements, specific threat
information, cost-benefit analyses, or special circumstances.
• Step 3: Implement the security controls in the information system.
• Step 4: Assess the security controls using appropriate methods and procedures to
determine the extent to which the controls are implemented correctly, operating as
intended, and producing the desired outcome with respect to meeting the security
requirements for the system. (Reference NIST SP 800-53A, Guide for Assessing the
Security Controls in Federal Information Systems). 
• Step 5: Authorize information system operation based upon a determination of the risk to
organizational operations, organizational assets, or to individuals resulting from the
operation of the information system and the decision that this risk is acceptable as
specified in NIST SP 800-37, Guide for the Security Certification and Accreditation of
Federal Information Systems.
• Step 6: Monitor and assess selected security controls in the information system on a
continuous basis including documenting changes to the system, conducting security
impact analyses of the associated changes, and reporting the security status of the system
to appropriate organizational officials on a regular basis. (Reference NIST SP 800-37 and
SP 800-53A). 
3.0 SECURITY CATEGORIZATION OF INFORMATION AND
INFORMATION SYSTEMS
Federal Information Processing Standard 199 (FIPS 199), Standards for Security Categorization
of Federal Information and Information Systems, defines the security categories, security
objectives, and impact levels to which SP 800-60 maps information types. FIPS 199 establishes
security categories based on the magnitude of harm expected to result from compromises rather
than on the results of an assessment that includes an attempt to determine the probability of
compromise. FIPS 199 also describes the context of use for this guideline. Some of the content
of FIPS 199 is included in this section in order to simplify the use of this guideline.
3.1 Security Categories and Objectives
3.1.1 Security Categories
FIPS 199 establishes security categories for both information and information systems. The
security categories are based on the potential impact on an organization should certain events
occur. The potential impacts could jeopardize the information and information systems needed
by the organization to accomplish its assigned mission, protect its assets, fulfill its legal
responsibilities, maintain its day-to-day functions, and protect individuals. Security categories
are to be used in conjunction with vulnerability and threat information in assessing the risk to an
organization.
FIPS 199 establishes three potential levels of impact (low, moderate, and high) relevant to
securing Federal information and information systems for each of three stated security objectives
(confidentiality, integrity, and availability).
3.1.2 Security Objectives and Types of Potential Losses
As reflected in Table 1, FISMA and FIPS 199 define three security objectives for information
and information systems. 
3.2 Impact Assessment
FIPS 199 defines three levels of potential impact on organizations or individuals should there be
a breach of security (i.e., a loss of confidentiality, integrity, or availability). The application of
these definitions must take place within the context of each organization and the overall national
interest. Table 2 provides FIPS 199 potential impact definitions. 
In FIPS 199, the security category of an information type can be associated with both user
information and system information and can be applicable to information in either electronic or
non-electronic form. It is also used as input in considering the appropriate security category for
a system. Establishing an appropriate security category for an information type simply requires
determining the potential impact for each security objective associated with the particular
information type. The generalized format for expressing the security category, or SC, of an
information type is: 
Security Category information type = {(confidentiality, impact), (integrity, impact), (availability,
impact)}
where the acceptable values for potential impact are low, moderate, high, or not applicable.
4.0 ASSIGNMENT OF IMPACT LEVELS AND SECURITY
CATEGORIZATION
This section provides a methodology for assigning security impact levels and security
categorizations for information types and information systems consistent with the organization's
assigned mission and business functions based on FIPS 199, Standards for Security
Categorization of Federal Information and Information Systems. This document assumes that
the user has read and is familiar with FIPS 199. Figure 2 illustrates the four-step security
categorization process and how it drives the selection of baseline security controls. 
Table 3 provides a step-by-step roadmap for identifying information types, establishing security
impact levels for loss of confidentiality, integrity, and availability of information types, and
assigning security categorization for the information types and for the information systems.
Security categorization is the basis for identifying an initial baseline set of security controls for
the information system. Each functional step in the process is explained in detail in Sections
4.1 through 4.4. 
4.1 Step 1: Identify Information Types
In accordance with FIPS 199, agencies shall identify all of the applicable information types that
are representative of input, stored, processed, and/or output data from each system. The initial
activity in mapping types of Federal information and information systems to security objectives
and impact levels is the development of an information taxonomy, or creation of a catalog of
information types. The basis for the identification of information types is the OMB's Business
Reference Model (BRM) described in the October 2007 publication, FEA Consolidated
Reference Model Document, Version 2.3. The BRM describes four business areas containing 39
FEA lines of business. The four business areas separate government operations into high-level
categories relating:
• The purpose of government (services for citizens);
• The mechanisms the government uses to achieve its purpose (mode of delivery);
• The support functions necessary to conduct government operations (support delivery
of services); and
• The resource management functions that support all areas of the government's
business (management of government resources).
The first two business areas, services for citizens and the mode of delivery represent the NIST SP
800-60 Mission-based Information Types and will be discussed first in the following section,
while support delivery of services and management of government resources represent
Management and Support Information Types and will be presented in Section 4.1.2.
Although this guideline identifies a number of information types and bases its taxonomy on the
BRM, only a few of the types identified are likely to be processed by any single system. Also,
each system may process information that does not fall neatly into one of the listed information
types. Once a set of information types identified in this guideline has been selected, it is prudent
to review the information processed by each system under review to see if additional types need
to be identified for impact assessment purposes. Also, it is recommended that organizational
officials maintain proper documentation of identified information types per information system
along with the basis for the information type selection. Guidance for documenting information
types is provided in Section 4.5.
4.1.1 Identification of Mission-based Information Types
This section describes a process for identifying mission-based information types and for
specifying the impact of unauthorized disclosure, modification, or unavailability of this
information. Mission-based information types are, by definition, specific to individual
departments and agencies or to specific sets of departments and agencies. The BRM services for
citizens business area provides the primary frame of reference for determining the security 
objectives impact levels for mission-based information and information systems. The
consequences or impact of unauthorized disclosure of information, modification or destruction of
information, and disruption of access to or use of information are defined by the nature and
beneficiary of the service being provided or supported. The BRM establishes 26 direct services
and delivery support lines of business with 98 associated information types (reference Table 4).
Two additional information types were included to address Executive Functions of the Executive
Office of the President and Trade Law Enforcement. These additions are identified by italics in
Table 4. 
The approach to establishing mission-based information types at an agency level begins by
documenting the agency's business and mission areas. The owner, or designee, of each
information system is responsible for identifying the information types stored in, processed by,
or generated by that information system. In the case of mission-based information, the
responsible individuals, in coordination with management, operational, and security
stakeholders, should compile a comprehensive set of lines of business and mission areas
conducted by the agency. In addition, the responsible individuals should identify the applicable
sub-functions necessary to conduct agency business and in turn accomplish the agency's
mission. For example, one mission conducted by an agency might be law enforcement. Sub-functions that are part of the agency's law enforcement mission might include criminal
investigation and surveillance, criminal apprehension, criminal incarceration, citizen protection,
crime prevention, and property protection. Each of these sub-functions would represent an
information type.
Recommended mission-based lines of business and constituent sub-functions that may be
processed by information systems are identified in Table 4 with details provided in Volume II,
Appendix D, "Examples of Impact Determination for Mission-based Information and
Information Systems." 
Implementation Tip
At the agency level, all government agencies perform at least one of the
mission areas and employ at least one of the services delivery
mechanisms described in Table 4. However, some information systems
may only provide a supporting role to the agency's mission and not
directly process any of the mission-based information types.
4.1.2 Identification of Management and Support Information
Much Federal government information and many supporting information systems are not
employed directly to provide direct mission-based services, but are primarily intended to support
delivery of services or to manage resources. The support delivery of services and management of
resources business areas are together composed of 13 lines of business (Tables 5 and 6). The 
BRM subdivides the lines of business into 72 sub-functions. The support delivery of services and
management of resource business areas are common to most Federal government agencies, and
the information associated with each of their sub-functions is identified in this guideline as a
management and support information type. Four additional management and support sub-factor
information types have been defined to address privacy information. One additional
management and support sub-factor information type has been defined to address General
Information as a catch-all information type that may not be defined by the FEA BRM. As such,
agencies may find it necessary to identify additional information types not defined in the BRM
and assign associated security impact levels to those types.
4.1.2.1 Services Delivery Support Information
Most information systems employed in both service delivery support and resource management
activities engage in one or more of the eight support delivery of services lines of business. Each
of the information types associated with support delivery of services sub-functions is provided in
Table 5. Volume II, Appendix C.2, "Services Delivery Support Functions," recommends
provisional impact levels for confidentiality, integrity, and availability security objectives. These
service support functions are the day-to-day activities necessary to provide the critical policy,
programmatic, and managerial foundation that support Federal government operations. The
direct service missions and constituencies ultimately being supported by service support
functions comprise a significant factor in determining the security impacts associated with
compromise of information associated with the support delivery of services business area. 
4.1.2.2 Government Resource Management Information
The government resource management information business area includes the back office
support activities enabling the Federal government to operate effectively. The five government
resource management information lines of business and the sub-functions associated with each 
information type are identified in Table 6. Volume II, Appendix C.3, "Government Resource
Management Information," recommends provisional impact levels for confidentiality, integrity,
and availability security objectives. Many departments and agencies operate their own support
systems. Others obtain at least some support services from other organizations. Some agencies'
missions are primarily to support other government departments and agencies in the conduct of
direct service missions. As indicated above, security objectives and associated security impact
levels for administrative and management information and systems are determined by the nature
of the supported direct services and constituencies being supported. 
4.1.3 Legislative and Executive Information Mandates
During the identification of information types within an information system, agency personnel
should afford special consideration for applicable governances addressing the information
processed and the agency's supported mission. Volume II, Appendix E lists legislative and
executive mandates establishing sensitivity and criticality guidelines for specific information
types.
4.1.4 Identifying Information Types Not Listed in this Guideline
The FEA BRM Information Types are provided only as a taxonomy guideline. Not all
information processed by an information system may be identified from Tables 4 through 6.
Therefore, an agency may identify unique information types not listed in this guideline or may
choose not to select provisional impact levels from Volume II, Appendix C (for management and
support information types) or Volume II, Appendix D (for mission-based information types).
Sections 4.2.1 through 4.2.3 of this guideline provide assistance to agencies in assigning
provisional security categories to agency-identified information types and information systems.
Additionally, SP 800-60 provides a management and support sub function, General Information
Type, which can be used by agencies as a means to identify and categorize information not 
contained in the FEA BRM. A complete description of the General Information Type
information should be captured in the agency's collection and documentation process.
4.2 Step 2: Select Provisional Impact Level
In Step 2, organizations should establish provisional impact levels based on the identified
information types in Step 1. The provisional impact levels are the original impact levels
assigned to the confidentiality, integrity, and availability security objectives of an information
type from Volume II before any adjustments are made. Also in this step, the initial security
categorization for the information type is established and documented.
Volume II, Appendix C suggests provisional confidentiality, integrity, and availability impact
levels for management and support information types, and Volume II, Appendix D provides
examples of provisional impact level assignments for mission-based information types. Using
the impact assessment criteria identified in Section 3.2 for the security objectives and types of
potential losses identified in Section 3.1.2, the organizational entity responsible for impact
determination must assign impact levels and consequent security categorization for the mission-based and management and support information types identified for each information system.
4.2.1 FIPS 199 Security Categorization Criteria
Where an information type processed by an information system is not categorized by this
guideline [based on information types identified in Volume II, Appendices C and D], an initial
impact determination will need to be made based on FIPS 199 categorization criteria (cited in
Table 7).
Agencies can assign security categories to information types and information systems by
selecting and adjusting appropriate Table 7 values for the potential impact of compromises of
confidentiality, integrity, and availability security objectives. Those responsible for impact level
selection and subsequent security categorization should apply the criteria provided in Table 7 to
each information type received by, processed in, stored in, and/or generated by each system for
which they are responsible. The security categorization will generally be determined based on
the most sensitive or critical information received by, processed in, stored in, and/or generated
by the system under review. 
4.2.2 Common Factors for Selection of Impact Levels
Where an agency determines security impact levels and security categorization based on local
application of FIPS 199 criteria, it is recommended that the following factors be considered with
respect to security impacts for each information type.
4.2.2.1 Confidentiality Factors
Using the FIPS 199 potential impact criteria summarized in Table 7, each information type
should be evaluated for confidentiality with respect to the impact level associated with
unauthorized disclosure of (i) each known variant of the information belonging to the type and
(ii) each use of the information by the system under review. Answers to the following questions
will help in the evaluation process:
• How can a malicious adversary use the unauthorized disclosure of information to do
limited/serious/severe harm to agency operations, agency assets, or individuals?
• How can a malicious adversary use the unauthorized disclosure of information to gain
control of agency assets that might result in unauthorized modification of information,
destruction of information, or denial of system services that would result in
limited/serious/severe harm to agency operations, agency assets, or individuals? 
• Would unauthorized disclosure/dissemination of elements of the information type violate
laws, executive orders, or agency regulations?
4.2.2.2 Integrity Factors
Using the FIPS 199 potential impact criteria summarized in Table 7, each information type
should be evaluated for integrity with respect to the impact level associated with unauthorized
modification or destruction of (i) each known variant of the information belonging to the type
and (ii) each use of the information by the system under review. Answers to the following
questions will help in the evaluation process:
• How can a malicious adversary use the unauthorized modification or destruction of
information to do limited/serious/severe harm to agency operations, agency assets, or
individuals?
• Would unauthorized modification/destruction of elements of the information type violate
laws, executive orders, or agency regulations?
Unauthorized modification or destruction of information can take many forms. The changes can
be subtle and hard to detect, or they can occur on a massive scale. One can construct an
extraordinarily wide range of scenarios for modification of information and its likely
consequences. Just a few examples include forging or modifying information to:
• Reduce public confidence in an agency;
• Fraudulently achieve financial gain;
• Create confusion or controversy by promulgating a fraudulent or incorrect procedure;
• Initiate confusion or controversy through false attribution of a fraudulent or false policy;
• Influence personnel decisions;
• Interfere with or manipulate law enforcement or legal processes;
• Influence legislation; or
• Achieve unauthorized access to government information or facilities.
In most cases, the most serious impacts of integrity compromise occur when some action is taken
that is based on the modified information or the modified information is disseminated to other
organizations or the public.
Undetected loss of integrity can be catastrophic for many information types. The consequences
of integrity compromise can be either direct (e.g., modification of a financial entry, medical alert,
or criminal record) or indirect (e.g., facilitation of unauthorized access to sensitive or private
information or deny access to information or information system services). Malicious use of
write access to information and information systems can do enormous harm to an agency's
mission and can be employed to use an agency system as a proxy for attacks on other systems.
In many cases, the consequences of unauthorized modification or destruction of information to
agency mission functions and public confidence in the agency can be expected to be limited. In
other cases, integrity compromises can result in the endangerment of human life or other severe
consequences. The impact can be particularly severe in the case of time-critical information. 
4.2.2.3 Availability Factors
Using the FIPS 199 potential impact criteria summarized in Table 7, each information type
should be evaluated for availability with respect to the impact level associated with the
disruption of access to or use of information of (i) each known variant of the information
belonging to the type and (ii) each use of the information by the system under review. Answers
to the following questions will help in the evaluation process:
• How can a malicious adversary use the disruption of access to or use of information to do
limited/serious/severe harm to agency operations, agency assets, or individuals?
• Would disruption of access to or use of elements of the information type violate laws,
executive orders, or agency regulations?
For many information types and information systems, the availability impact level depends on
how long the information or system remains unavailable. Undetected loss of availability can be
catastrophic for many information types. For example, permanent loss of budget execution,
contingency planning, continuity of operations, service recovery, debt collection, taxation
management, personnel management, payroll management, security management, inventory
control, logistics management, or accounting information databases would be catastrophic for
almost any agency. Complete reconstruction of such databases would be time consuming and
expensive.
In most cases, the adverse effects of a limited-duration availability compromise on an
organization's mission functions and public confidence will be limited. In contrast, for time-critical information types, availability is less likely to be restored before serious harm is done to
agency assets, operations, or personnel (or to public welfare). In such instances, the documented
availability impact level recommendations should indicate the information is time-critical and
the basis for criticality.
4.2.3 Examples of FIPS 199-Based Selection of Impact Levels
FIPS 199-based examples of security objective impact selection and security categorization for
sample information types follow:
EXAMPLE 1: An organization managing public information on its web server determines that
there is no potential impact from a loss of confidentiality (i.e., confidentiality requirements are
not applicable), a moderate potential impact from a loss of integrity, and a moderate potential
impact from a loss of availability. The resulting security category of this information type is
expressed as:
Security Category public information = {(confidentiality, n/a), (integrity, moderate), (availability,
moderate)}.
EXAMPLE 2: A law enforcement organization managing extremely sensitive investigative
information determines that the potential impact from a loss of confidentiality is high, the
potential impact from a loss of integrity is moderate, and the potential impact from a loss of
availability is moderate. The resulting security category for this type of information is expressed
as: 
Security Category investigative information= {(confidentiality, high), (integrity, moderate), (availability,
moderate)}.
EXAMPLE 3: A financial organization managing routine administrative information (not privacyrelated information) determines that the potential impact from a loss of confidentiality is low, the
potential impact from a loss of integrity is low, and the potential impact from a loss of
availability is low. The resulting security category of this information type is expressed as:
Security Category administrative information = {(confidentiality, low), (integrity, low), (availability, low)}.
In general, security objective impact assessment is independent of mechanisms employed to
mitigate the consequences of a compromise.
4.3 Step 3: Review Provisional Impact Levels and Adjust/Finalize
Information Type Impact Levels
In Step 3, organizations should review and adjust the provisional security impact levels for
the security objectives of each information type and arrive at a finalized state. To accomplish
this, organizations should: (i) review the appropriateness of the provisional impact levels
based on the organization, environment, mission, use, and data sharing; (ii) adjust the
security objective impact levels as necessary using the special factors guidance found in
Volume II, Appendices C and D; and (iii) document all adjustments to the impact levels and
provide the rationale or justification for the adjustments.
When security categorization impact levels recommended in Section 4.2 or Volume II,
Appendices C and D are adopted as provisional security impact levels, the agency should
review the appropriateness of the provisional impact levels in the context of the organization,
environment, mission, use, and data sharing associated with the information system under
review. This review should include the agency's mission importance; lifecycle and
timeliness implications; configuration and security policy related information; special
handling requirements; etc. The FIPS 199 factors presented in Section 4.2.2 of this
document should be used as the basis for decisions regarding adjustment or finalization of the
provisional impact levels. The confidentiality, integrity, and availability impact levels may
be adjusted one or more times in the course of the review. Once the review and adjustment
process is complete, the mapping of impact levels by information type can be finalized.
The impact of information compromise of a particular type can vary in different agencies or
in dissimilar operational contexts. Also, the impact for an information type may vary
throughout the life cycle. For example, contract information that has a moderate
confidentiality impact level during the life of the contract may have a low impact level when
the contract is completed. Policy information may have moderate confidentiality and
integrity impact levels during the policy development process, low confidentiality and
moderate integrity impact levels when the policy is implemented, and low confidentiality and
integrity impact levels when the policy is no longer used. 
The impact levels associated with the management and support information common to many
agencies are strongly affected by the mission-based information with which it is associated. That
is, agency-common management and support information used with very sensitive or critical
mission-based information types may have higher impact levels than the same agency-common
information used with less critical mission-based information types.
Further, information systems process many types of information. Not all of these information
types are likely to have the same security impact levels. The compromise of some information
types will jeopardize system functionality and agency mission more than the compromise of
other information types. System security impact levels must be assessed in the context of system
mission and function as well as on the basis of the aggregate of the component information
types.
Additionally, configuration and security policy enforcement information should be reviewed
and adjusted considering the information processed on the system. Configuration and
security policy information includes password files, network access rules, other hardware and
software configuration settings, and documentation affecting access to the information
system's data, programs, and/or processes. At a minimum, a low confidentiality and
integrity impact level will apply to this set of information and processes due to a potential for
corruption, misuse, or abuse of system information and processes.
A factor specific to the confidentiality objective is information subject to special handling (e.g.,
information subject to the Privacy Act of 1974, 5 U.S.C. § 552A). Regardless of other
considerations, some minimum confidentiality impact level must be assigned to any information
system that stores, processes, or generates such information. Examples of such information
include information subject to the Trade Secrets Act, the Privacy Act, Department of Energy
Safeguards Information, Internal Revenue Service Official Use Only Information, and
Environmental Protection Agency Confidential Business Information (e.g., subject to Toxic
Substances Control Act; Resource Conservation and Recovery Act; Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act). Some of these statutory and
regulatory specifications are listed in Volume II, Appendix E, "Legislative and Executive
Sources Establishing Sensitivity/Criticality."
4.4 Step 4: Assign System Security Category
Once the security impact levels have been selected, reviewed and adjusted as necessary for the
security objectives of each individual information type processed by an information system, it is
necessary to assign a system security category based on the aggregate of information types. The
Step 4 activities include the following: (i) review identified security categorizations for the
aggregate of information types; (ii) determine the system security categorization by identifying
the high water mark for each of the security objectives (confidentiality, integrity, availability)
based on the aggregate of the information types; (iii) adjust the high water mark for each system
security objective, as necessary, by applying the factors discussed in section 4.4.2; (iv) assign the
overall information system impact level based on the highest impact level for the system security
objectives; and (v) document all security categorization determinations and decisions.
4.4.1 FIPS 199 Process for System Security Categorization
FIPS 199 recognizes that determining the security category of an information system requires
additional analysis and must consider the security categories of all information types resident on
the information system. For an information system, the potential security impact levels assigned
to each of the respective security objectives (confidentiality, integrity, availability) are the
highest level (i.e., high water mark) for any one of these objectives that has been determined for
the types of information resident on the information system.
Information systems are composed of both computer programs and information. Programs in
execution within an information system (i.e., system processes) facilitate the processing, storage,
and transmission of information and are necessary for the organization to conduct its essential
business functions and operations. These system-processing functions also require protection and
could be subject to security categorization as well. However, in the interest of simplification, it is
assumed that the security categorization of all information types associated with the information
system provide an appropriate worst case potential for the overall information system—thereby
obviating the need to consider the system processes in the security categorization of the
information system. This is in recognition of:
• The fundamental requirement to protect the integrity, availability, and, for key
information such as passwords and encryption keys, the confidentiality of system-level
processing functions and information at the high water mark; and
• The strong interdependence between confidentiality, integrity, and availability.
For this reason, FIPS 199 notes that, while the value (i.e., level) of not applicable can apply to a
security objective for specific information types processed by systems, this value cannot be
assigned to any security objective for an information system. There is a minimum provisional
impact (i.e., low water mark) for a compromise of confidentiality, integrity, and availability for
an information system. This is necessary to protect the system-level processing functions and
information critical to the operation of the information system.
The generalized format for expressing the security category, or SC, of an information system is:
SC information system = {(confidentiality, impact), (integrity, impact), (availability, impact)},
where the acceptable values for potential impact are LOW, MODERATE, or HIGH.
The following examples illustrate the system security categorization process described in FIPS
199.
SYSTEM EXAMPLE 1: An information system used for large acquisitions in a contracting
organization contains both sensitive, pre-solicitation phase contract information and routine
administrative information. The management within the contracting organization determines
that: (i) for the sensitive contract information, the potential impact from a loss of confidentiality
is moderate, the potential impact from a loss of integrity is moderate, and the potential impact
from a loss of availability is low; and (ii) for the routine administrative information (non-privacy-related information), the potential impact from a loss of confidentiality is low, the
potential impact from a loss of integrity is low, and the potential impact from a loss of
availability is low. The resulting security categories, or SC, of these information types are
expressed as: 
SC contract information = {(confidentiality, MODERATE), (integrity, MODERATE), (availability, LOW)}, and
SC administrative information = {(confidentiality, LOW), (integrity, LOW), (availability, LOW)}.
The resulting security category of the information system is expressed as:
SC acquisition system = {(confidentiality, MODERATE), (integrity, MODERATE), (availability, LOW)},
representing the high water mark or maximum potential impact values for each security objective
from the information types resident on the acquisition system.
SYSTEM EXAMPLE 2: A power plant contains a SCADA (supervisory control and data acquisition)
system controlling the distribution f electric power for a large military installation. The SCADA
system contains both real-time sensor data and routine administrative information. The
management at the power plant determines that: (i) for the sensor data being acquired by the
SCADA system, there is no potential impact from a loss of confidentiality, a high potential
impact from a loss of integrity, and a high potential impact from a loss of availability; and (ii) for
the administrative information being processed by the system, there is a low potential impact
from a loss of confidentiality, a low potential impact from a loss of integrity, and a low potential
impact from a loss of availability. The resulting security categories, or SC, of these information
types are expressed as:
SC sensor data = {(confidentiality, NA), (integrity, HIGH), (availability, HIGH)}, and
SC administrative information = {(confidentiality, LOW), (integrity, LOW), (availability, LOW)}.
The resulting security category of the information system is initially expressed as:
SC SCADA system = {(confidentiality, LOW), (integrity, HIGH), (availability, HIGH)},
representing the high water mark or maximum potential impact values for each security objective
from the information types resident on the SCADA system. The management at the power plant
chooses to increase the potential impact from a loss of confidentiality from low to moderate
reflecting a more realistic view of the potential impact on the information system should there be
a security breach due to the unauthorized disclosure of system-level information or processing
functions. The final security category of the information system is expressed as:
SC SCADA system = {(confidentiality, MODERATE), (integrity, HIGH), (availability, HIGH)}.
4.4.2 Guidelines for System Categorization
In some cases, the impact level for a system security category will be higher than any security
objective impact level for any information type processed by the system.
The primary factors that most commonly raise the impact levels of the system security category
above that of its constituent information types are aggregation and critical system functionality.
Additionally, variations in sensitivity/criticality with respect to time may need to be factored into
the impact assignment process. Some information loses its sensitivity in time (e.g.,
economic/commodity projections after they've been published). Other information is
particularly critical at some point in time (e.g., weather data in the terminal approach area during
aircraft landing operations). This section provides some general guidelines regarding how
aggregation, critical functionality, and other system factors may affect system security
categorization. 
Implementation Tip
Agency personnel should be aware that there are several factors that
should be considered during the aggregation of system information
types. When considering these factors, previously unforeseen concerns
may surface affecting the confidentiality, integrity, and/or availability
impact levels at the system level. These factors include data
aggregation, critical system functionality, extenuating circumstances,
and other system factors.
In order to effectively accomplish this step, various stakeholders (e.g., management, operational
personnel, or security experts) may need to be involved in decisions regarding system-level
impact assessments. The following sections provide factors to consider in adjusting the system
security objective impact levels.
4.4.2.1 Aggregation
Some information may have little or no sensitivity in isolation but may be highly sensitive in
aggregation. In some cases, aggregation of large quantities of a single information type can
reveal sensitive patterns and plans, or facilitate access to sensitive or critical systems. In other
cases, aggregation of information of several different and seemingly innocuous types can have
similar effects. In general, the sensitivity of a given data element is likely to be greater in
context than in isolation (e.g., association of an account number with the identity of an individual
and/or institution). The availability, routine operational employment, and sophistication of data
aggregation and inference tools are all increasing rapidly. If review reveals increased sensitivity
or criticality associated with information aggregates, then the system security objective impact
levels may need to be adjusted to a higher level than would be indicated by the security impact
levels associated with any individual information type. This could be implemented by
incorporating a statement that explains the aggregation and potential security objective affected
as well as the modification to impact levels.
4.4.2.2 Critical System Functionality
Compromise of some information types may have low impact in the context of a system's
primary function but may have much more significance when viewed in the context of the
potential impact of compromising:
• Other systems to which the system in question is connected, or
• Other systems which are dependent on that system's information.
Access control information for a system that processes only low impact information might
initially be thought to have only low impact security objectives. However, if access to that
system might result in some form of access to other systems (e.g., over a network), the sensitivity
and criticality attributes of all systems to which such indirect access can result needs to be
considered. Similarly, some information may, in general, have low sensitivity and/or criticality
security objectives. However, that information may be used by other systems to enable
extremely sensitive or critical functions (e.g., air traffic control use of weather information or use
of commercial flight information to identify military combat transport systems). Loss of data
integrity, availability, temporal context, or other context can have catastrophic consequences. 
4.4.2.3 Extenuating Circumstances
This publication focuses on categorizing an information system based on its information types
and associated security objective impacts. There are times when a system security objective
impact level should be elevated based on reasons other than its information. For example, the
information system provides critical process flow or security capability, the visibility of the
system to the public, the sheer number of other systems reliant on its operation or possibly its
overall cost of replacement. These examples, given a specific situation, may provide reason for
the system owner to increase the overall security impact level of a system.
An elevation based on extenuating circumstances can be more apparent by comparing the
original security categorization to the business impact analysis. If the system was categorized
based on FIPS 199 at a Moderate overall impact level but the system owner has determined it
needs to be operational within 4-8 hours of a disruption irrespective of the aggregated
information type availability security impact level assigned, then there is a disconnect that might
be caused by the system's extenuating circumstances. Agencies must customize the information
system availability security impact level as appropriate to obtain full value and accuracy.
4.4.2.4 Other System Factors
Public Information Integrity
Most Federal agencies maintain web pages that are accessible to the public. The vast majority of
these public web pages permit interaction between the site and the public. In some cases, the site
provides only information. In other cases, forms may be submitted via the website (e.g.,
applications for service or job applications). In some cases, the site is a medium for business
transactions. Unauthorized modification or destruction of information affecting external
communications (e.g., web pages, electronic mail) may adversely affect operations and/or public
confidence in the agency. In most cases, the damage can be corrected within a relatively short
period of time, and the damage is limited (impact level is low). In other cases (e.g., very large
fraudulent transactions or modification of a web page belonging to an intelligence/security
community component), the damage to mission function and/or public confidence in the agency
can be serious. In such cases, the integrity impact associated with unauthorized modification or
destruction of a public web page would be at least moderate.
Catastrophic Loss of System Availability
Either physical or logical destruction of major assets can result in very large expenditures to
restore the assets and/or long periods of time for recovery. Permanent loss/unavailability of
information system capabilities can seriously hamper agency operations and, where direct
services to the public are involved, have a severe adverse effect on public confidence in Federal
agencies. Particularly in the case of large systems, FIPS 199 criteria suggest that catastrophic
loss of system availability may result in a high availability impact level. Whether or not the
impact level of system availability should be high (and subsequent high system security impact
level) is dependent on other factors, such as cost and criticality of the system, rather than on the
security impact levels for the information types being processed by the system.
Large Supporting and Interconnecting Systems 
Large or complex information systems composed of multiple lower level systems often require
additional consideration regarding assignment of system security categorization. This section
will provide guidelines for applying and interrelating individual system security categorization
results to enterprise organizations, large supporting infrastructures (such as general support
systems, data warehouse applications, large data storage units, server farms, and information
repositories), and interconnecting systems.
Upon security categorization identification for all information systems interacting with large
infrastructure systems, senior IT and security officials have possession of valuable information
that can now enable an enterprise wide security perspective. One significant activity includes
levying an overall security categorization for the agency's supporting network infrastructures.
Since networks, as well as other general support systems, do not inherently "own" mission-based
or management and support information types, the infrastructure's categorization is based on the
aggregation of the information systems' security categorizations. In other words, the
infrastructure's security categorization is the high water mark of the supported information
systems and is based on the information types processed, flowed, or stored on the network or
general support system. Together, the top down enterprise wide threat assessment and bottom up
security assessment derived by aggregation will allow an organization to look at its risk profile
from a comprehensive and balanced view. Further, this analysis will ensure the proper
application of common security controls supporting the multiple information systems and the
protection provided by those controls are inherited by the individual systems.
Critical Infrastructures and Key Resources
Where the mission served by an information system, or the information that the system
processes, affects the security of critical infrastructures and key resources, the harm that results
from a compromise requires particularly close attention. In this case, an effect on security might
include a significant reduction in the effectiveness of physical or cyber security protection
mechanisms, or facilitation of a terrorist attack on critical infrastructures and key resources.
Accordingly, the system security categorization should be carefully determined when a loss of
confidentiality, integrity, or availability will result in a negative impact on the critical
infrastructures and key resources.
The Critical Information Infrastructure Act of 2002, Public Law 107-296 §§ 211-215 of
November 25, 2002 (codified as 6 U.S.C. 131-134), defines the term "critical infrastructure
information" to mean information not customarily in the public domain and related to the
security of critical infrastructure or protected systems. Should information types be aligned with
Critical Infrastructures, then action should be taken to ensure compliance with Homeland
Security Presidential Directive No. 7 (HSPD 7) and to initiate an interdependency analysis.
Privacy Information
The E-Government Act of 2002 complements privacy protection requirements of the Privacy Act
of 1974. Under the terms of these public laws, Federal government agencies have specific 
responsibilities regarding collection, dissemination or disclosure of information regarding
individuals.
The September 26, 2003 OMB Memorandum M-03-22, "OMB Guidance for Implementing the
Privacy Provisions of the E-Government Act of 2002," puts the privacy provisions of the EGovernment Act of 2002 into effect. The guidance applies to information that identifies
individuals in a recognizable form, including name, address, telephone number, Social Security
Number, and e-mail addresses. OMB instructed agency heads "to describe how the government
handles information that individuals provide electronically, so that the American public has
assurances that personal information is protected." Under these public laws and executive
policies, it is necessary to broaden the definition of "unauthorized disclosure" to encompass any
access, use, disclosure, or sharing of privacy-protected information among Federal government
agencies when such actions are prohibited by privacy laws and policies. Since most privacy
regulations focus on access, use, disclosure, or sharing of information, privacy considerations are
dealt with in this guideline as special factors affecting the confidentiality impact level. In
establishing confidentiality impact levels for each information type, responsible parties must
consider the consequences of unauthorized disclosure of privacy information (with respect to
violations of Federal policy and/or law).
Agencies are required to conduct Privacy Impact Assessments (PIAs) before developing IT
systems that contain personally identifiable information or before collecting personally
identifiable information electronically. The impact of privacy violations should consider any
adverse effects experienced by individuals or organizations as a result of the loss of PII
confidentiality. Examples of adverse effects experienced by individuals may include blackmail,
identity theft, discrimination, or emotional distress. Examples of adverse effects experienced by
organizations may include administrative burden, financial losses, loss of public reputation and
confidence, and the penalties associated with violation of the relevant statutes and policies.
Categorizations should be reviewed to ensure that the adverse effects of a loss of PII
confidentiality have been adequately factored into impact determinations. The confidentiality
impact level should generally fall into the moderate range.
Trade Secrets
There are several laws that specifically prohibit unauthorized disclosure of trade secrets (e.g., 7
U.S.C., Chapter 6, Subchapter II, Section 136h and 42 U.S.C., Chapter 6A, Subchapter XII, Part
E, Section 300j-4(d)(1)). Systems that store, communicate, or process trade secrets will
generally be assigned at least a moderate confidentiality impact level.
4.4.3 Overall Information System Impact
Since the impact values (i.e., levels) for confidentiality, integrity, and availability may not
always be the same for a particular information system, the high water mark concept is used to 
determine the overall impact level of the information system. The security impact level for an
information system will generally be the highest impact level for the security objectives
(confidentiality, integrity, and availability) associated with the aggregate of system information
types. Thus, a low-impact system is defined as an information system in which all three of the
security objectives are low. A moderate-impact system is an information system in which at least
one of the security objectives is moderate and no security objective is greater than moderate. And
finally, a high-impact system is an information system in which at least one security objective is
high.
4.5 Documenting the Security Categorization Process
Essential to the security categorization process is documenting the research, key decisions and
approvals, and supporting rationale driving the information system security categorization. This
information is key to supporting the security life cycle and will need to be included in the
information system's security plan.
Figure 3 provides an example of information details that should be collected.
In addition, agencies may consider enhancing their SSPs with other analyses, decisions,
assignments, and or approvals that were used in the categorization process. Examples may
include:
• Agency's business and mission areas (Step 1 in Table 1)
• Legislative and executive information mandates affecting the information impact
assignment or adjustment (Section 4.1.3)
• Indicating whether the information is time-critical in rationales for assigning availability
impact levels (Section 4.2.2.3)
• Rationales for assigning information to the General Information Type (Section 4.1.2,
Implementation Tip)
• Results of reviews of the appropriateness of the provisional impact levels for information
(Section 4.3) 
• Results of considering the potential impacts to other organizations and considering, "in
accordance with the USA Patriot Act of 2001 and Homeland Security Presidential
Directives, potential national-level impacts in categorizing the information system"
(NIST SP 800-53 security control RA-2)
• Results of reviewing the identified security categorizations for the aggregate of
information types (Step 4 in Table 1)
• Effects of various factors and circumstances (e.g., data aggregation, critical system
functionality, privacy, trade secrets, critical infrastructure, aggregation, critical system
functionality, extenuating circumstances) on the system category (Section 4.4.2)
• Whether and why the agency determined that the system impact level must be higher than
any of the levels of the information types that the system processes (Section 4.4)
• Approvals of all determinations or decisions (Step 4 in Table 1)
4.6 Uses of Categorization Information
The results of system security categorization can and should be used by, or made available to,
appropriate agency personnel to support agency activities including:
• Business Impact Analysis (BIA): Agency personnel should consider the cross-utilization
of security categorization and BIA information in the performance of each activity. Their
common objectives enable agencies to mutually draw from them, thus, providing checks
and balances to ensure accuracy for each information system. Conflicting information
and anomalous conditions, such as a low availability impact and a BIA three-hour
recovery time objective, should trigger a reevaluation by the mission and data owners.
• Capital Planning and Investment Control (CPIC) and Enterprise Architecture (EA): Just
as no IT investment should be made without a business-approved architecture, the
security categorization that begins the security life cycle is a business-enabling activity
directly feeding the enterprise architecture and CPIC processes for new investments, as
well as migration and upgrade decisions. Specifically, the security categorization can
provide a firm basis for justifying certain capital expenditures and also can provide
analytical input to avoid unnecessary investments.
• System Design: Understanding and designing the system architecture with varying
information sensitivity levels in mind may assist in achieving economies of scale with
security services and protection through common security zones within the enterprise.
For example, an information system containing privacy information may be located in
one security zone with other information systems containing similar sensitive
information. Each zone may have varying levels of security. For instance, the more
critical zones may require 3-factor authentication where the open area may only require
normal access controls. This type of approach requires a solid understanding of an
agency's information and data types gained through the security categorization process. 
• Contingency and Disaster Recovery Planning: Contingency and disaster recovery
planning personnel should review information systems that have multiple data types of
varying impact levels and consider grouping applications with similar information system
impact levels with sufficiently protected infrastructures. This ensures efficient application
of the correct contingency and disaster protection security controls and avoids the over
protection of lower impact information systems.
• Information Sharing and System Interconnection Agreements: Agency personnel should
utilize aggregated and individual security categorization information when assessing
interagency connections. For example, knowing that information processed on a high
impact information system is flowing to another agency's moderate impact information
system should cause both agencies to evaluate the security categorization information, the
implemented or resulting security controls, and the risk associated with interconnecting
systems. The results of this evaluation may substantiate the need for additional security
controls in the form of a Service Level Agreement, information systems upgrades,
additional mitigating security controls, or alternative means of sharing the required
information. 