1.0 Introduction
This document provides guidelines developed in conjunction with the Department of
Defense, including the National Security Agency, for identifying an information system
as a national security system. The basis for these guidelines is the Federal Information
Security Management Act of 2002 (FISMA, Title III, Public Law 107-347, December 17,
2002), which provides government-wide requirements for information security,
superseding the Government Information Security Reform Act and the Computer
Security Act.
FISMA both provides a framework for ensuring the effectiveness of information security
controls over information resources that support Federal operations and assets and
provides for the maintenance of minimum controls required to protect Federal
information and information systems. Federal agencies are responsible for providing
information security protection of information collected or maintained by or on behalf of
the agency and information systems used or operated by or on behalf of the agency. The
head of each Federal agency is also responsible for (1) assessing the risk and magnitude
of the harm that could result from unauthorized access, use, disclosure, disruption,
modification, or destruction of information or information systems that support
operations or assets under their control; (2) determining the levels of information
security appropriate to protect such information and information systems; (3)
implementing policies and procedures to cost-effectively reduce risks to an acceptable
level; and (4) periodically testing and evaluating information security controls and
techniques to ensure that they are effectively implemented.
Except for national security systems as defined by FISMA, the Secretary of Commerce is
responsible for prescribing standards and guidelines pertaining to Federal information
systems on the basis of standards and guidelines developed by NIST. The Committee on
National Security Systems (CNSS) along with Federal agencies that operate systems
falling within the definition of national security systems provide security standards and
guidance for national security systems. In addition to defining the term national security
system FISMA amended the NIST Act, at 15 U.SC. 278g-3(b)(3), to require NIST to
provide guidelines for identifying an information system as a national security system. As
stated in the House Committee report, "This guidance is not to govern such systems, but
rather to ensure that agencies receive consistent guidance on the identification of systems
that should be governed by national security system requirements." Report of the
Committee on Government Reform, U. S House of Representatives, Report 107-787,
November 14, 2002, p. 85.
The Department of Defense and the Director, Central Intelligence have authority to
develop policies, guidelines, and standards for national security systems. The Director,
Central Intelligence is responsible for policies relating to systems processing intelligence
information. The Committee for National Security Systems, whose executive agent is the
National Security Agency, was established to develop operating policies, procedures,
guidelines, instructions and standards as necessary to implement provisions of the
National Policy for the Security of National Security Telecommunications and 
Information Systems (see NSTISSD Number 502). The Director of the Office of
Management and Budget (OMB) retains responsibility for oversight of national security
system information security policies and practices with respect to:
• Overseeing agency compliance with the requirements of Subchapter III of
Chapter 35 of Title 44, United States Code, including through any authorized
action under Title 40, United States Code, section 11303, to enforce
accountability for compliance with such requirements; and
• Reporting to Congress no later than March 1 of each year on agency compliance
with the requirements of Subchapter III of Chapter 35 of Title 44 United States
Code, including –
o A summary of the findings of evaluations required by 44 U.S.C. 3545;
o An assessment of the development, promulgation, and adoption of, and
compliance with, standards developed under 15 USC 278g-3 and
promulgated under 40 U.S.C. 11331;
o Significant deficiencies in agency information security practices;
o Planned remedial action to address such deficiencies; and
o A summary of, and OMB views on, the report prepared by NIST under 15
USC 278g-3.
Accordingly, the purpose of these guidelines is not to establish requirements for national
security systems, but rather to assist agencies in determining which, if any, of their
systems are national security systems as defined by FISMA and are to be governed by
applicable requirements for such systems, issued in accordance with law and as directed
by the President. 
2.0 Basis for Identification of National Security Systems
The basis for the identification of 'national security systems' is the definition provided in
law (44 U.S.C. 3542(b)(2), which was established by FISMA, Title III, Public Law 107­
347, December 17, 2002):
"(2)(A) The term `national security system' means any information system (including
any telecommunications system) used or operated by an agency or by a contractor
of an agency, or other organization on behalf of an agency—
(i) the function, operation, or use of which—
(I) involves intelligence activities;
(II) involves cryptologic activities related to national security;
(III) involves command and control of military forces;
(IV) involves equipment that is an integral part of a weapon or weapons
system; or
(V) subject to subparagraph (B), is critical to the direct fulfillment of
military or intelligence missions; or
(ii) is protected at all times by procedures established for information that have
been specifically authorized under criteria established by an Executive order or an
Act of Congress to be kept classified in the interest of national defense or foreign
policy.
(B) Subparagraph (A)(i)(V) does not include a system that is to be used for routine
administrative and business applications (including payroll, finance, logistics, and
personnel management applications)."
Systems not meeting any of these criteria are not national security systems. (Further
delineation of the legal definition of the term national security system is found in
Appendix A to this guideline.)
As described in the House Committee report, FISMA's national security system
definition "encompasses the longstanding statutory treatment of military and intelligence 
mission-related systems and classified systems." House Report 107-787, p. 77. It
combines the "Warner Amendment" national security system definition, e.g., section
5142 of the Clinger-Cohen Act, at 40 U.S.C. 11103(a), and the treatment of classified
systems under section 3 of the Computer Security Act of 1987. 
3.0 Method for Identifying National Security Systems
3.1 Determination of Responsibilities
The head of each agency is responsible for designating an agency information security
official to determine which, if any, agency systems are national security systems.
Each agency is responsible for identification of all national security systems under its
ownership or control. Answering each of the questions stated in the National Security
System Identification Checklist, provided as Appendix A to this guideline, is one method
for documenting the basis for determination. If the answer to any of the questions is
affirmative, the system is designated a national security system. Note that use of the
specific form provided in Appendix A is not mandatory. Agencies may develop and use
an alternate methodology. It is anticipated that some agencies will require answers to
additional questions. However, each of the questions listed on the sample checklist
should be answered and recorded.
Ideally, a national security system should be designated as early as possible in its life
cycle. The set of certification and accreditation standards, policies, procedures,
guidelines, and instructions that apply to each system depend on whether or not the
system is a national security system. For systems that are currently in operation, and for
which no national security determination has been made, such determination should be
accomplished as soon as possible.
Under the provisions of Title 44 United States Code § 3542(b)(2)(A)(i)(V), it is possible
that some systems not originally established as national security systems may become
national security systems as a result of being designated as critical to the direct
fulfillment of military or intelligence missions. If the manager of a military or
intelligence mission determines that a system is critical to that mission, and the system
has not previously been identified as a national security system, the manager responsible
for that mission must so identify the system to the responsible entity designated by the
head of the agency that owns and/or operates the system (see Appendix A, Section
A.1.5).
When the manager of a military or intelligence mission determines that a system is no
longer critical to that mission, or when the mission is terminated, the manager responsible
for that mission must so notify the responsible entity designated by the head of the
agency that owns and/or operates the system, and the system ceases to be designated a
national security system. [Note that if a system is designated as a national security
system and then removed from that designation (and possibly be moved back at a later
time), it may prove very difficult to satisfy the changing security requirements on the
system. Therefore, such actions should not be taken casually.] 
3.2 National Security System Identification Checklist
The National Security System Identification Checklist provided in Appendix A includes
six questions. An affirmative answer to one or more of the six questions should result in
the system being designated as a national security system. The six questions included in
the checklist is only the minimum set of questions on which a national security
designation may be based. Individual departments and agencies may choose to include
additional questions so long as the decision regarding designation of a system as a
national security system is based exclusively on the definition provided in Section 2.0 of
this guideline.
3.3 Dispute Resolution
In some cases, a system owner may disagree with a determination by an organization
supported by the system regarding whether the system is critical to the direct fulfillment
of military or intelligence missions. If the agency that owns and/or operates a system
disputes identification of the system as a national security system, either the agency or
the mission manager may submit the issue to both the CNSS and the appropriate office at
the Office of Management and Budget (OMB). OMB will coordinate with other
cognizant offices of the Executive Office of the President as required.
If there is a dispute regarding security classification of information processed by a
system, the dispute must be submitted to the appropriate internal challenge program for
resolution. If the dispute cannot be resolved under the internal challenge program, or if a
dispute involves more than one agency, the issue may be submitted to the Information
Security Oversight Office (ISOO) for resolution. The ISOO may be contacted at
Information Security Oversight Office, National Archives and Records Administration,
700 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW, Room 500, Washington, DC 20408. Any remaining
issues may be submitted to the National Security Council.