Abstract
The protection of Controlled Unclassified Information (CUI) in nonfederal systems and
organizations is important to federal agencies and can directly impact the ability of the Federal
Government to successfully carry out its assigned missions and business operations. This
publication provides federal agencies and nonfederal organizations with assessment procedures
that can be used to carry out assessments of the requirements in NIST Special Publication 800-
172, Enhanced Security Requirements for Protecting Controlled Unclassified Information: A
Supplement to NIST Special Publication 800-171. The assessment procedures are flexible and can
be tailored to the needs of organizations and assessors. Assessments can be conducted as 1)
self-assessments; 2) independent, third-party assessments; or 3) government-sponsored
assessments. The assessments can be conducted with varying degrees of rigor based on
customer-defined depth and coverage attributes. The findings and evidence produced during
the assessments can be used to facilitate risk-based decisions by organizations related to the
CUI enhanced security requirements.
DEFINITION AND USAGE OF THE TERM INFORMATION SYSTEM
Unless specified by legislation, regulation, or government-wide policy, the term system is used
in this publication instead of information system. This change reflects a broad-based and holistic
definition of systems that includes general-purpose systems, industrial control systems, cyber-physical systems, and individual devices that are part of the Internet of Things. As computing
systems and information technologies are deployed ubiquitously worldwide and systems and
components are increasingly connected through wired and wireless networks, the susceptibility
of Controlled Unclassified Information to loss or compromise grows – as does the potential for
adverse consequences resulting from such occurrences.
ORGANIZATIONAL SYSTEMS
The term organizational system is used in many of the CUI enhanced security requirements in
[SP 800-172] and the associated assessment procedures in this publication. In that context, an
organizational system is a nonfederal system that processes, stores, or transmits CUI associated
with a critical program or high value asset. Specifically, enhanced security requirements apply
to the system components or services that process, store, or transmit CUI or that provide
security protections for those components or services as mandated by a federal agency in a
contract, grant, or other agreement.
CHAPTER ONE
INTRODUCTION
THE NEED TO ASSESS ENHANCED SECURITY REQUIREMENTS FOR CUI
n 2010, Executive Order 13556 established a government-wide Controlled Unclassified
Information (CUI) Program to standardize the way that the executive branch handles
unclassified information that requires protection. The regulation that implements the CUI
Program is 32 CFR part 2002. Only federal information that requires safeguarding or
dissemination controls pursuant to federal law, regulation, or government-wide policy may be
designated as CUI. NIST Special Publication (SP) 800-172, a supplement to NIST SP 800-171,
specifies enhanced security requirements to ensure the confidentiality, integrity, and availability
of CUI when it is associated with a high value asset or a critical program.
1.1 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY
The purpose of this publication is to describe procedures for assessing the enhanced security
requirements in [SP 800-172].
Compliance with the security requirements is addressed in CUI
guidance and the CUI Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) or as supplemented by federal
agencies (e.g., Department of Defense Federal Acquisition Regulation). Organizations can use
the assessment procedures to generate evidence to support the assertion that the enhanced
security requirements have been satisfied. The assessment procedures are typically used as part
of an assessment process. An assessment process is an information-gathering and evidence-producing activity to determine the effectiveness of the safeguards implemented to meet the
set of security requirements specified in [SP 800-172]. The information gathered and evidence
produced can be used by an organization to:
• Identify problems or shortfalls in the organization's security and risk management programs,
• Identify security weaknesses and deficiencies in organizational systems and the
environments in which those systems operate,
• Prioritize risk mitigation decisions and activities,
• Confirm that identified security weaknesses and deficiencies in organizational systems and
environments of operation have been addressed,
• Support continuous monitoring activities, and
• Provide information security situational awareness.
The assessment procedures in this publication offer the flexibility to customize assessments
based on organizational policies and requirements, known threat and vulnerability information,
system and platform dependencies, operational considerations, and tolerance for risk.
THE SCOPE OF ENHANCED SECURITY REQUIREMENT ASSESSMENTS
The scope of the assessments conducted using the procedures described in this publication is
guided and informed by the system security plans for the organizational systems processing,
storing, or transmitting CUI. The assessments focus on the overall effectiveness of the security
safeguards intended to satisfy the enhanced security requirements defined in [SP 800-172].
1.2 TARGET AUDIENCE
This publication serves system, information security, and privacy professionals, including
individuals with:
• System development responsibilities (e.g., program managers, system developers, system
owners, systems integrators, system security engineers);
• Information security assessment and monitoring responsibilities (e.g., system evaluators,
assessors, independent verifiers/validators, auditors, analysts, system owners);
• Information security, privacy, risk management, governance, and oversight responsibilities
(e.g., authorizing officials, chief information officers, chief privacy officers, chief information
security officers, system managers, information security managers); and
• Information security implementation and operational responsibilities (e.g., system owners,
information owners/stewards, mission and business owners, systems administrators, system
security officers).
1.3 ORGANIZATION OF THIS SPECIAL PUBLICATION
The remainder of this special publication is organized as follows:
Chapter Two describes the fundamental concepts associated with assessments of CUI enhanced
security requirements, including assessment procedures, methods, objects, and assurance cases
that can be created using evidence produced during assessments.
Chapter Three provides a catalog of assessment procedures for the CUI enhanced security
requirements in [SP 800-172], including assessment objectives and potential assessment
methods and objects for each procedure.
Supporting appendices provide additional assessment-related information, including general
References, a Glossary, a list of Acronyms, and a description of the Assessment Methods used
in assessment procedures.
CHAPTER TWO
THE FUNDAMENTALS
BASIC CONCEPTS FOR ASSESSMENTS OF CUI ENHANCED SECURITY REQUIREMENTS
the CUI enhanced security requirements in [SP 800-172] are organized into 10 families, as
illustrated in Table 1. The process to assess the CUI enhanced security requirements
includes preparing for assessment, developing assessment plans, conducting assessments,
and analyzing results. The assessment procedures in Chapter Three are grouped by family
designations to help ensure the completeness and consistency of assessments.
2.1 ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES
An assessment procedure consists of an assessment objective and a set of potential assessment
methods and objects that can be used to conduct the assessment. Each assessment objective
includes a set of determination statements related to the CUI enhanced security requirement
that is the subject of the assessment. Organization-defined parameters (ODP) that are part of
selected enhanced security requirements are included in the initial determination statements
for the assessment procedure. ODPs are included since the specified parameter values are used
in subsequent determination statements. ODPs are numbered sequentially and noted in bold
italics.
Determination statements reflect the content of the enhanced security requirements to ensure
traceability of the assessment results to the requirements. The application of an assessment
procedure to an enhanced security requirement produces assessment findings. The findings are
used to determine if the enhanced security requirement has been satisfied. Assessment objects
are associated with the specific items being assessed. These objects can include specifications,
mechanisms, activities, and individuals. Specifications are the document-based artifacts (e.g.,
security policies, procedures, plans, requirements, functional specifications, architectural 
designs) associated with a system. Mechanisms are the specific hardware, software, or firmware
safeguards employed within a system. Activities are the protection-related actions supporting a
system that involve people (e.g., conducting system backup operations, exercising a contingency
plan, and monitoring network traffic). Individuals are people who apply the specifications,
mechanisms, or activities described above.
Assessment methods define the nature and extent of the assessor's actions. The methods
include examine, interview, and test. The examine method is the process of reviewing,
inspecting, observing, studying, or analyzing assessment objects (i.e., mechanisms, activities,
specifications). The interview method is the process of holding discussions with individuals or
groups of individuals to facilitate understanding, achieve clarification, or obtain evidence. The
test method is the process of exercising assessment objects (i.e., activities, mechanisms) under
specified conditions to compare actual with expected behavior. The purpose of the assessment
methods is to facilitate understanding, achieve clarification, and obtain evidence. The results
obtained from applying the methods are used for making the specific determinations called for
in the determination statements and thereby achieving the objectives for the assessment
procedure.
The assessment methods described above have associated attributes of depth and coverage,
which affect the level of effort for the assessment. These attributes provide a means to define
the rigor and scope of the assessment to obtain the assurance needed for enhanced security
requirements. A description of assessment methods and objects is provided in Appendix C.
Figure 1 illustrates an example of an assessment procedure for the CUI enhanced security
requirement 3.1.3e from [SP 800-172].
Organizations are not expected to use all of the assessment methods and objects contained
within the assessment procedures identified in this publication. Rather, organizations have the
flexibility to establish the level of effort needed and the assurance required for an assessment
(e.g., which assessment methods and objects are deemed to be the most useful in obtaining the
desired results). The decision on level of effort is made based on how the organization can
accomplish the assessment objectives in the most cost-effective and efficient manner and with
sufficient confidence to support the determination that the CUI enhanced security requirements
have been satisfied.
ORGANIZATION-DEFINED PARAMETERS
Selected enhanced security requirements contain selection and assignment operations to give
organizations flexibility in defining variable parts of those requirements. Selection operations
require organizations to select from a list of predefined items. Assignment operations require
organizations to define specific parameter values. Determination statements for organization-defined parameters (ODP) are listed first in the assessment objective section followed by the list
of determination statements for the assessment objective. Determination statements for ODPs
are noted in bold italics. The ODP values are used in the appropriate determination statements
in the assessment procedure, also noted in bold italics.
2.2 ASSURANCE CASES
Building an effective assurance case for determining compliance to the enhanced security
requirements is a process that involves compiling evidence from a variety of sources and
conducting different types of assessment activities. An assurance case is a body of evidence
organized into an argument demonstrating that some claim about a system is true. For the
assessments conducted using the procedures in this publication, that claim is compliance with
the enhanced security requirements specified in [SP 800-172]. Assessors obtain evidence during
the assessment process to allow designated officials to make objective determinations about
compliance to the CUI enhanced security requirements. The evidence needed to make such
determinations can be obtained from various sources, including self-assessments, independent
third-party assessments, government-sponsored assessments, or other types of assessments,
depending on the needs of the organization establishing the requirements and the organization
conducting the assessments.
For example, some enhanced security requirements are satisfied by security capabilities built
into commercial information technology products and systems. Product assessments are
typically conducted by independent, third-party testing organizations. These assessments 
examine the security functions of the products and the established configuration settings.
Assessments can also be conducted to demonstrate compliance to industry, national, or
international security standards, as well as developer and vendor claims. Since many
information technology products are assessed by commercial testing organizations and then
subsequently deployed in hundreds of thousands of systems, these assessments can be carried
out at a greater level of depth and provide deeper insights into the security capabilities of the
products.
Ultimately, the evidence needed to determine compliance comes from the implementation of
the safeguards to satisfy the enhanced security requirements and from the assessments of that
implementation. Assessors can build on previously developed artifacts that started with the
specification of the organization's information security needs and is further developed during
the design, development, and implementation of the system and system components. These
artifacts, obtained while implementing security throughout the system development life cycle,
provide the initial evidence for an assurance case.
Assessments can be conducted by system developers, system integrators, system owners,
evaluators, auditors, or the security staff of organizations. The assessors or assessment teams
begin by obtaining and reviewing the results from individual component product or compliance
assessments. The assessors then determine the additional system-level assessments required to
achieve the needed assurance using the procedures and methods contained in this publication
and based on the specific implementation information provided by nonfederal organizations in
their system security plans. Assessments can be used to compile and evaluate the evidence
needed by organizations to determine the effectiveness of the safeguards implemented to
protect CUI, the actions needed to mitigate security-related risks, and compliance to the
enhanced security requirements.
SECURITY ASSESSMENT PLANS
The system security plan is used to describe how the organization meets or plans to meet the
CUI enhanced security requirements. Once the organization completes the system security plan,
a security assessment plan can be developed using the appropriate assessment procedures
described in Chapter Three. An assessment procedure is developed for each enhanced security
requirement that is selected for the system or system component. The assessment procedures
can be tailored to meet the specific needs of the organization. [SP 800-53A] provides additional
information on how organizations can prepare for assessments, develop assessment plans,
conduct assessments, and analyze results.
CHAPTER THREE
THE PROCEDURES
ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES, METHODS, AND OBJECTS FOR ENHANCED SECURITY REQUIREMENTS
this chapter provides assessment procedures for the CUI enhanced security requirements
defined in [SP 800-172]. The assessment procedures are organized into 10 families, as
illustrated in Table 1. Plans for conducting enhanced security requirement assessments are
built using the information provided in the assessment procedures – selecting the assessment
methods and objects that meet the desired assurance requirements. Organizations also have
flexibility in defining the level of rigor and detail associated with the assessment based on those
assurance requirements. Appendix C provides additional information on the levels of rigor and
detail for assessments.
The assessment objective for an assessment procedure is achieved by applying the designated
assessment methods to the selected assessment objects and producing the evidence necessary
to make the determination associated with the objective. Each determination statement
produces a finding of either satisfied or other than satisfied. A finding of satisfied indicates that
– for the security requirement addressed by the determination statement – the assessment
information obtained (i.e., the evidence collected) demonstrates that the assessment objective
has been met, producing a fully acceptable result. A finding of other than satisfied indicates that
– for the security requirement addressed by the determination statement – the assessment
findings demonstrate potential anomalies that may need to be addressed by the organization.
The findings may also indicate that the assessor was unable to obtain sufficient information to
make the determination for reasons described in the assessment report.
For assessment findings that are other than satisfied, organizations may define subcategories of
findings that indicate the severity or criticality of the weaknesses or deficiencies discovered and
potential adverse impacts on organizational missions or business functions. Such subcategories
can help to establish priorities for needed risk mitigation actions.
CAUTIONARY NOTE
This publication can be used for many different assessment-related purposes in determining
whether implementing organizations satisfy the CUI enhanced security requirements in [SP 800-
172]. Organizations have the flexibility to tailor the assessment procedures by selecting the
assessment methods and objects needed to achieve the stated assessment objectives. These
methods and objects are needed to obtain the evidence to support claims of compliance. There
is no expectation that every assessment method and object in an assessment procedure will
be used for every assessment. Moreover, the list of potential assessment objects should not be
viewed as required artifacts needed to determine compliance with the requirements.
3.1 ACCESS CONTROL
3.1.1e ENHANCED SECURITY REQUIREMENT
Employ dual authorization to execute critical or sensitive system and organizational
operations.
ASSESSMENT OBJECTIVE
Determine if:
3.1.1e[a] Critical or sensitive system and organizational operations for which dual
authorization is to be enforced are identified.
3.1.1e[b] Dual authorization is employed to execute critical or sensitive system and
organizational operations.
POTENTIAL ASSESSMENT METHODS AND OBJECTS
3.1.1e Examine: [SELECT FROM: List of critical or sensitive system and organizational operations;
access control policy; dual authorization policy; procedures addressing access enforcement
and dual authorization; security plan; configuration management plan; system design
documentation; system configuration settings and associated documentation; list of privilege
access authorizations; commands requiring dual authorization; list of actions requiring dual
authorization; system audit records; list of approved authorizations (user privileges); system
generated list of dual authorization credentials or rules; logs or records of deletion or
destruction of backup information; list of system media requiring dual authorization for
sanitization; authorization records; media sanitization records; audit records; other relevant
documents or records].
3.1.1e Interview: [SELECT FROM: System and network administrators; system developers;
organizational personnel responsible for access enforcement, system backup, dual
authorization enforcement for implementing system changes, system media sanitization,
audit and accountability, and information security].
3.1.1e Test: [SELECT FROM: Mechanisms implementing the enforcement of dual authorization].
3.1.2e ENHANCED SECURITY REQUIREMENT
Restrict access to systems and system components to only those information resources
that are owned, provisioned, or issued by the organization.
ASSESSMENT OBJECTIVE
Determine if:
3.1.2e[a] Information resources that are owned, provisioned, or issued by the
organization are identified.
3.1.2e[b] Access to systems and system components is restricted to only those
information resources that are owned, provisioned, or issued by the
organization.
POTENTIAL ASSESSMENT METHODS AND OBJECTS
3.1.2e Examine: [SELECT FROM: Access control policy; procedures addressing the use of external
systems; list of information resources owned, provisioned, or issued by the organization;
security plan; system design documentation; system configuration settings and associated
documentation; system connection or processing agreements; system audit records; account
management documents; other relevant documents or records].
3.1.2e Interview: [SELECT FROM: Organizational personnel responsible for restricting or prohibiting
the use of non-organizationally owned systems, system components, or devices; system and
network administrators; organizational personnel responsible for system security].
3.1.2e Test: [SELECT FROM: Mechanisms implementing restrictions on the use of non-organizationally owned systems, components, or devices].
3.1.3e ENHANCED SECURITY REQUIREMENT
Employ [Assignment: organization-defined secure information transfer solutions] to
control information flows between security domains on connected systems.
ASSESSMENT OBJECTIVE
Determine if:
3.1.3e_ODP[1] Secure information transfer solutions are defined.
3.1.3e[a] Information flows between security domains on connected systems are
identified.
3.1.3e[b] <3.1.3e_ODP[1]: solutions> are employed to control information flows
between security domains on connected systems.
POTENTIAL ASSESSMENT METHODS AND OBJECTS
3.1.3e Examine: [SELECT FROM: Access control policy; information flow control policies; procedures
addressing information flow enforcement; system design documentation; security plan;
system configuration settings and associated documentation; system audit records; system
baseline configuration; list of information flow authorizations; other relevant documents or
records].
3.1.3e Interview: [SELECT FROM: System and network administrators; organizational personnel
responsible for information security; system developers].
3.1.3e Test: [SELECT FROM: Mechanisms implementing information flow enforcement policy;
mechanisms implementing secure information transfer solutions].
3.2 AWARENESS AND TRAINING
3.2.1e ENHANCED SECURITY REQUIREMENT
Provide awareness training [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] focused on
recognizing and responding to threats from social engineering, advanced persistent threat
actors, breaches, and suspicious behaviors; update the training [Assignment:
organization-defined frequency] or when there are significant changes to the threat.
ASSESSMENT OBJECTIVE
Determine if:
3.2.1e_ODP[1] The frequency of providing awareness training is defined.
3.2.1e_ODP[2] The frequency of updating awareness training is defined.
3.2.1e[a] Threats from social engineering, advanced persistent threat actors,
breaches, and suspicious behaviors are identified.
3.2.1e[b] Awareness training focused on recognizing and responding to threats
from social engineering, advanced persistent threat actors, breaches,
and suspicious behaviors is provided <3.2.1e_ODP[1]: frequency>.
3.2.1e[c] Significant changes to the threats from social engineering, advanced
persistent threat actors, breaches, and suspicious behaviors are
identified.
3.2.1e[d] Awareness training is updated <3.2.1e_ODP[2]: frequency> or when
there are significant changes to the threat.
POTENTIAL ASSESSMENT METHODS AND OBJECTS
Examine: [SELECT FROM: Awareness training policy; procedures addressing awareness training
implementation; appropriate codes of federal regulations; awareness training curriculum;
awareness training materials; security plan; training records; threat information on social
engineering, advanced persistent threat actors, suspicious behaviors, and breaches; other
relevant documents or records].
Interview: [SELECT FROM: Organizational personnel responsible for awareness training;
organizational personnel responsible for information security; organizational personnel
comprising the general system user community].
Test: [SELECT FROM: Mechanisms managing awareness training; mechanisms managing threat
information].
3.2.2e ENHANCED SECURITY REQUIREMENT
Include practical exercises in awareness training for [Assignment: organization-defined
roles] that are aligned with current threat scenarios, and provide feedback to individuals
involved in the training and their supervisors.
ASSESSMENT OBJECTIVE
Determine if:
3.2.2e_ODP[1] Roles to be included in awareness training practical exercises are
defined.
3.2.2e[a] Practical exercises are identified.
3.2.2e[b] Current threat scenarios are identified.
3.2.2e[c] Individuals involved in training and their supervisors are identified.
3.2.2e[d] Practical exercises that are aligned with current threat scenarios are
included in awareness training for <3.2.2e_ODP[1]: roles>.
3.2.2e[e] Feedback is provided to individuals involved in the training and their
supervisors.
POTENTIAL ASSESSMENT METHODS AND OBJECTS
Examine: [SELECT FROM: Awareness training policy; procedures addressing awareness training
implementation; appropriate codes of federal regulations; awareness training curriculum;
awareness training materials; security plan; training records; threat information on social
engineering, advanced persistent threat actors, suspicious behaviors, breaches, or other
relevant adversary tactics, techniques, or procedures; feedback on practical exercises and
awareness training; other relevant documents or records].
Interview: [SELECT FROM: Organizational personnel responsible for awareness training;
organizational personnel responsible for information security; organizational personnel
with roles identified for practical exercises; supervisors of personnel with roles identified
for practical exercises].
Test: [SELECT FROM: Mechanisms managing awareness training; mechanisms managing threat
information].
3.3 AUDIT AND ACCOUNTABILITY
There are no enhanced security requirements for audit and accountability.
3.4 CONFIGURATION MANAGEMENT
3.4.1e ENHANCED SECURITY REQUIREMENT
Establish and maintain an authoritative source and repository to provide a trusted source
and accountability for approved and implemented system components.
ASSESSMENT OBJECTIVE
Determine if:
3.4.1e[a] Approved system components are identified.
3.4.1e[b] Implemented system components are identified.
3.4.1e[c] An authoritative source and repository are established to provide a
trusted source and accountability for approved and implemented system
components.
3.4.1e[d] An authoritative source and repository are maintained to provide a
trusted source and accountability for approved and implemented system
components.
POTENTIAL ASSESSMENT METHODS AND OBJECTS
Examine: [SELECT FROM: Configuration management policy; procedures addressing the baseline
configuration of the system; configuration management plan; enterprise architecture
documentation; system design documentation; system architecture and configuration
documentation; system configuration settings and associated documentation; change
control records; system and system component inventory records; inventory reviews and
update records; security plan; system audit records; change control audit and review
reports; other relevant documents or records].
Interview: [SELECT FROM: Organizational personnel responsible for configuration management;
organizational personnel responsible for system component inventory; organizational
personnel responsible for configuration change control; organizational personnel
responsible for information security; system/network administrators; members of a
change control board or similar].
Test: [SELECT FROM: Mechanisms that implement configuration change control; mechanisms
supporting configuration control of the baseline configuration; mechanisms supporting and/or
implementing the system component inventory].
3.4.2e ENHANCED SECURITY REQUIREMENT
Employ automated mechanisms to detect misconfigured or unauthorized system
components; after detection, [Selection (one or more): remove the components; place the
components in a quarantine or remediation network] to facilitate patching, reconfiguration, or other mitigations.
ASSESSMENT OBJECTIVE
Determine if:
3.4.2e_ODP[1] One or more of the following is/are selected: remove the components;
place the components in a quarantine or remediation network.
3.4.2e[a] Automated mechanisms to detect misconfigured or unauthorized system
components are identified.
3.4.2e[b] Automated mechanisms are employed to detect misconfigured or
unauthorized system components.
3.4.2e[c] Misconfigured or unauthorized system components are detected.
3.4.2e[d] After detection, system components are <3.4.2.e_ODP[1]: removed
and/or placed in a quarantine or remediation network> to facilitate
patching, re-configuration, or other mitigations.
POTENTIAL ASSESSMENT METHODS AND OBJECTS
Examine: [SELECT FROM: Configuration management policy; procedures addressing the baseline
configuration of the system; configuration management plan; authoritative source or
repository; enterprise architecture documentation; system design documentation; system
architecture and configuration documentation; system procedures addressing system
configuration change control; configuration settings and associated documentation;
change control records; change control audit and review reports; agenda/minutes from
configuration change control oversight meetings; alerts/notifications of unauthorized
baseline configuration changes; security plan; system audit records; other relevant
documents or records].
Interview: [SELECT FROM: Organizational personnel responsible for configuration management;
organizational personnel responsible for information security; organizational personnel
responsible for configuration change control; system developers; system/network
administrators; members of a change control board or similar roles].
Test: [SELECT FROM: Automated mechanisms supporting configuration control of the baseline
configuration; automated mechanisms that implement security responses to changes to the
baseline configurations; automated mechanisms that implement configuration change control;
automated mechanisms that detect misconfigured or unauthorized system components].
3.4.3e ENHANCED SECURITY REQUIREMENT
Employ automated discovery and management tools to maintain an up-to-date, complete,
accurate, and readily available inventory of system components.
ASSESSMENT OBJECTIVE
Determine if:
3.4.3e[a] Automated discovery and management tools for the inventory of system
components are identified.
3.4.3e[b] An up-to-date, complete, accurate, and readily available inventory of
system components exists.
3.4.3e[c] Automated discovery and management tools are employed to maintain
an up-to-date, complete, accurate, and readily available inventory of
system components.
POTENTIAL ASSESSMENT METHODS AND OBJECTS
Examine: [SELECT FROM: Configuration management policy; configuration management plan;
procedures addressing system component inventory; procedures addressing the baseline
configuration of the system; configuration management plan; system design
documentation; system architecture and configuration documentation; security plan;
system configuration settings and associated documentation; configuration change
control records; system inventory records; change control records; system maintenance
records; system audit records; other relevant documents or records].
Interview: [SELECT FROM: Organizational personnel responsible for information security;
organizational personnel responsible for configuration management; organizational
personnel responsible for managing the automated mechanisms implementing the
system component inventory; system developers; system/network administrators].
Test: [SELECT FROM: Automated mechanisms implementing baseline configuration maintenance;
automated mechanisms implementing the system component inventory].
3.5 IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION
3.5.1e ENHANCED SECURITY REQUIREMENT
Identify and authenticate [Assignment: organization-defined systems and system
components] before establishing a network connection using bidirectional authentication
that is cryptographically-based and replay-resistant.
ASSESSMENT OBJECTIVE
Determine if:
3.5.1e_ODP[1] Systems and system components to identify and authenticate are
defined.
3.5.1e[a] Bidirectional authentication that is cryptographically-based is
implemented.
3.5.1e[b] Bidirectional authentication that is replay-resistant is implemented.
3.5.1e[c] <3.5.1e_ODP[1]: systems and system components> are identified and
authenticated before establishing a network connection using
bidirectional authentication that is cryptographically-based and replayresistant.
POTENTIAL ASSESSMENT METHODS AND OBJECTS
Examine: [SELECT FROM: Identification and authentication policy; procedures addressing device
identification and authentication; network connection policy; security plan; system
configuration settings and associated documentation; system design documentation; list
of devices requiring unique identification and authentication; device connection reports;
system audit records; list of privileged system accounts; other relevant documents or
records].
Interview: [SELECT FROM: Organizational personnel responsible for system operations;
organizational personnel responsible for account management; organizational personnel
responsible for device identification and authentication; organizational personnel
responsible for information security; system/network administrators; system
developers].
Test: [SELECT FROM: Cryptographically-based bidirectional authentication mechanisms; mechanisms
supporting and/or implementing network connection policy; mechanisms supporting and/or
implementing replay-resistant authentication mechanisms; mechanisms supporting and/or
implementing an identification and authentication capability; mechanisms supporting and/or
implementing a device identification and authentication capability].
3.5.2e ENHANCED SECURITY REQUIREMENT
Employ automated mechanisms for the generation, protection, rotation, and management
of passwords for systems and system components that do not support multifactor
authentication or complex account management.
ASSESSMENT OBJECTIVE
Determine if:
3.5.2e[a] Systems and system components that do not support multifactor
authentication or complex account management are identified.
3.5.2e[b] Automated mechanisms for the generation, protection, rotation, and
management of passwords for systems and system components that do
not support multifactor authentication or complex account management
are identified.
3.5.2e[c] Automated mechanisms for the generation, protection, rotation, and
management of passwords for systems and system components that do
not support multifactor authentication or complex account management
are employed.
POTENTIAL ASSESSMENT METHODS AND OBJECTS
Examine: [SELECT FROM: Identification and authentication policy; password policy; procedures
addressing authenticator management; system design documentation; security plan;
system configuration settings and associated documentation; list of system authenticator
types; change control records associated with managing system authenticators; system
audit records; password configurations and associated documentation; other relevant
documents or records].
Interview: [SELECT FROM: Organizational personnel responsible for information security;
organizational personnel responsible for authenticator management; system developers;
system/network administrators].
Test: [SELECT FROM: Automated mechanisms supporting and/or implementing an authenticator
management capability].
3.5.3e ENHANCED SECURITY REQUIREMENT
Employ automated or manual/procedural mechanisms to prohibit system components
from connecting to organizational systems unless the components are known,
authenticated, in a properly configured state, or in a trust profile.
ASSESSMENT OBJECTIVE
Determine if:
3.5.3e[a] System components that are known, authenticated, in a properly
configured state, or in a trust profile are identified.
3.5.3e[b] Automated or manual/procedural mechanisms to prohibit system
components from connecting to organizational systems are identified.
3.5.3e[c] Automated or manual/procedural mechanisms are employed to prohibit
system components from connecting to organizational systems unless the
components are known, authenticated, in a properly configured state, or
in a trust profile.
POTENTIAL ASSESSMENT METHODS AND OBJECTS
Examine: [SELECT FROM: Configuration management policy; identification and authentication
policy; system and information integrity policy; procedures addressing system component
inventory; procedures addressing device identification and authentication; procedures
addressing device configuration management; procedures addressing system monitoring
tools and techniques; configuration management plan; security plan; system design
documentation; system configuration settings and associated documentation; system
inventory records; configuration management records; system monitoring records;
alerts/notifications of unauthorized components within the system; change control
records; system audit records; system monitoring tools and techniques documentation;
documented authorization/approval of network services; notifications or alerts of
unauthorized network services; system monitoring logs or records; other relevant
documents or records].
Interview: [SELECT FROM: Organizational personnel responsible for managing the mechanisms
implementing unauthorized system component detection; organizational personnel
responsible for device identification and authentication; organizational personnel
responsible for information security; organizational personnel responsible for installing,
configuring, and/or maintaining the system; system/network administrators;
organizational personnel responsible for monitoring the system; system developers].
Test: [SELECT FROM: Mechanisms implementing the detection of unauthorized system components;
mechanisms supporting and/or implementing a device identification and authentication 
capability; mechanisms for providing alerts; mechanisms supporting and/or implementing
configuration management; cryptographic mechanisms supporting device attestation;
mechanisms supporting and/or implementing a system monitoring capability; mechanisms for
auditing network services].
3.6 INCIDENT RESPONSE
3.6.1e ENHANCED SECURITY REQUIREMENT
Establish and maintain a security operations center capability that operates [Assignment:
organization-defined time period].
ASSESSMENT OBJECTIVE
Determine if:
3.6.1e_ODP[1] A time period to operate a security operations center capability is
defined.
3.6.1e[a] A security operations center capability is established.
3.6.1e[b] The security operations center capability operates <3.6.1e_ODP[1]: time
period>.
3.6.1e[c] The security operations center capability is maintained.
POTENTIAL ASSESSMENT METHODS AND OBJECTS
Examine: [SELECT FROM: Incident response policy; contingency planning policy; procedures
addressing incident handling; procedures addressing the security operations center
operations; mechanisms supporting dynamic response capabilities; incident response
plan; contingency plan; security plan; other relevant documents or records].
Interview: [SELECT FROM: Organizational personnel responsible for incident handling; organizational
personnel responsible for contingency planning; security operations center personnel;
organizational personnel responsible for information security].
Test: [SELECT FROM: Mechanisms that support and/or implement the security operations center
capability; mechanisms that support and/or implement the incident handling process].
3.6.2e ENHANCED SECURITY REQUIREMENT
Establish and maintain a cyber incident response team that can be deployed by the
organization within [Assignment: organization-defined time period].
ASSESSMENT OBJECTIVE
Determine if:
3.6.2e_ODP[1] A time period for deploying a cyber incident response team is defined.
3.6.2e[a] A cyber incident response team is established.
3.6.2e[b] The cyber incident response team can be deployed by the organization
within <3.6.2e_ODP[1]: time period>.
3.6.2e[c] The cyber incident response team is maintained.
POTENTIAL ASSESSMENT METHODS AND OBJECTS
Examine: [SELECT FROM: Incident response policy; procedures addressing incident response;
incident response plan; security plan; other relevant documents or records].
Interview: [SELECT FROM: Organizational personnel responsible for incident response;
organizational personnel from the incident response team; organizational personnel
responsible for information security].
Test: [SELECT FROM: Mechanisms supporting and/or implementing incident response].
3.7 MAINTENANCE
There are no enhanced security requirements for maintenance.
3.8 MEDIA PROTECTION
There are no enhanced security requirements for media protection.
3.9 PERSONNEL SECURITY
3.9.1e ENHANCED SECURITY REQUIREMENT
Conduct [Assignment: organization-defined enhanced personnel screening] for individuals
and reassess individual positions and access to CUI [Assignment: organization-defined
frequency].
ASSESSMENT OBJECTIVE
Determine if:
3.9.1e_ODP[1] Enhanced personnel screening for individuals is defined.
3.9.1e_ODP[2] The frequency with which to reassess individual positions and access to
CUI is defined.
3.9.1e[a] Individuals that require enhanced personnel screening are identified.
3.9.1e[b] Positions that require access to CUI are identified.
3.9.1e[c] <3.9.1e_ODP[1]: enhanced personnel screening> is conducted for
individuals.
3.9.1e[d] Individual positions and access to CUI is reassessed <3.9.1e_ODP[2]:
frequency>.
POTENTIAL ASSESSMENT METHODS AND OBJECTS
Examine: [SELECT FROM: Personnel security policy; system and services acquisition policy; records
of screened personnel; procedures addressing personnel screening; security plan; list of
appropriate access authorizations required by developers of the system; personnel
screening criteria and associated documentation; other relevant documents or records].
Interview: [SELECT FROM: Organizational personnel responsible for personnel security;
organizational personnel responsible for information security; organizational personnel
responsible for system and services acquisition; organizational personnel responsible for
developer and personnel screening].
Test: [SELECT FROM: Organizational processes for personnel screening; organizational processes for
developer screening; mechanisms supporting developer screening].
3.9.2e ENHANCED SECURITY REQUIREMENT
Ensure that organizational systems are protected if adverse information develops or is
obtained about individuals with access to CUI.
ASSESSMENT OBJECTIVE
Determine if:
3.9.2e[a] Individuals with access to CUI are identified.
3.9.2e[b] Adverse information about individuals with access to CUI is defined.
3.9.2e[c] Organizational systems to which individuals have access are identified.
3.9.2e[d] Mechanisms are in place to protect organizational systems if adverse
information develops or is obtained about individuals with access to CUI.
POTENTIAL ASSESSMENT METHODS AND OBJECTS
Examine: [SELECT FROM: Personnel security policy; system and services acquisition policy;
procedures addressing personnel screening; records of screened personnel; enterprise
architecture documentation; system design documentation; system architecture and
configuration documentation; security plan; list of individuals who have been identified as
posing an increased level of risk; list of appropriate access authorizations required for
system personnel; personnel screening criteria and associated documentation; other
relevant documents or records].
Interview: [SELECT FROM: Organizational personnel responsible for personnel security;
organizational personnel responsible for information security; organizational personnel
responsible for system and services acquisition; organizational personnel responsible for
personnel screening].
Test: [SELECT FROM: Organizational processes for personnel screening; mechanisms supporting
personnel screening].
3.10 PHYSICAL PROTECTION
There are no enhanced security requirements for physical protection.
3.11 RISK ASSESSMENT
3.11.1e ENHANCED SECURITY REQUIREMENT
Employ [Assignment: organization-defined sources of threat intelligence] as part of a risk
assessment to guide and inform the development of organizational systems, security
architectures, selection of security solutions, monitoring, threat hunting, and response
and recovery activities.
ASSESSMENT OBJECTIVE
Determine if:
3.11.1e_ODP[1] Sources of threat intelligence are defined.
3.11.1e[a] A risk assessment methodology is identified.
3.11.1e[b] <3.11.1e_ODP[1]: sources of threat intelligence> are employed as part
of a risk assessment to guide and inform the development of
organizational systems and security architectures.
3.11.1e[c] <3.11.1e_ODP[1]: sources of threat intelligence> are employed as part
of a risk assessment to guide and inform the selection of security
solutions.
3.11.1e[d] <3.11.1e_ODP[1]: sources of threat intelligence> are employed as part
of a risk assessment to guide and inform system monitoring activities.
3.11.1e[e] <3.11.1e_ODP[1]: sources of threat intelligence> are employed as part
of a risk assessment to guide and inform threat hunting activities.
3.11.1e[f] <3.11.1e_ODP[1]: sources of threat intelligence> are employed as part
of a risk assessment to guide and inform response and recovery
activities.
POTENTIAL ASSESSMENT METHODS AND OBJECTS
Examine: [SELECT FROM: Information security program plan; risk assessment policy; threat
awareness program documentation; procedures for the threat awareness program;
security planning policy and procedures; procedures addressing organizational
assessments of risk; threat hunting program documentation; procedures for the threat
hunting program; risk assessment results relevant to threat awareness; threat hunting
results; list or other documentation on the cross-organization, information-sharing
capability; security plan; risk assessment; risk assessment results; risk assessment reviews;
risk assessment updates; contingency planning policy; contingency plan; incident response
policy; incident response plan; other relevant documents or records].
Interview: [SELECT FROM: Organizational personnel responsible for information security program
planning and plan implementation; organizational personnel responsible for the threat
awareness and threat hunting programs; organizational personnel responsible for risk
assessments; organizational personnel responsible for the cross-organization,
information-sharing capability; organizational personnel responsible for information
security; organizational personnel responsible for contingency planning; organizational
personnel responsible for incident response; personnel with whom threat awareness
information is shared by the organization].
Test: [SELECT FROM: Mechanisms supporting and/or implementing the threat awareness program;
mechanisms supporting and/or implementing the cross-organization, information-sharing
capability; mechanisms supporting and/or implementing the threat hunting program;
mechanisms for conducting, documenting, reviewing, disseminating, and updating risk
assessments; mechanisms supporting and/or implementing contingency plans; mechanisms
supporting and/or implementing incident response plans].
3.11.2e ENHANCED SECURITY REQUIREMENT
Conduct cyber threat hunting activities [Selection (one or more): [Assignment:
organization-defined frequency]; [Assignment: organization-defined event]] to search for
indicators of compromise in [Assignment: organization-defined systems] and detect, track,
and disrupt threats that evade existing controls.
ASSESSMENT OBJECTIVE
Determine if:
3.11.2e_ODP[1] One or more of the following is/are selected: the frequency with which
to conduct cyber threat hunting activities; the event triggering cyber
threat hunting activities.
3.11.2e_ODP[2] The frequency with which to conduct cyber threat hunting activities is
defined. (If selected in 3.11.2e_ODP[1])
3.11.2e_ODP[3] The event triggering cyber threat hunting activities is defined. (If
selected in 3.11.2e_ODP[1])
3.11.2e_ODP[4] Organizational systems to search for indicators of compromise are
defined.
3.11.2e[a] Indicators of compromise are identified.
3.11.2e[b] Cyber threat hunting activities are conducted <3.11.2e_ODP[2]
frequency and/or 3.11.2e_ODP[3] event> to search for indicators of
compromise in <3.11.2e_ODP[4]: systems>.
3.11.2e[c] Cyber threat hunting activities are conducted <3.11.2e_ODP[2]
frequency and/or 3.11.2e_ODP[3] event> to detect, track, and disrupt
threats that evade existing controls.
POTENTIAL ASSESSMENT METHODS AND OBJECTS
Examine: [SELECT FROM: System and information integrity policy; policy and procedures addressing
system monitoring; threat hunting program documentation; procedures for the threat
hunting program; threat hunting results; system design documentation; security plan;
system monitoring tools and techniques documentation; security planning policy and
procedures; system configuration settings and associated documentation; system
monitoring logs or records; system audit records; other relevant documents or records].
Interview: [SELECT FROM: Organizational personnel responsible for threat hunting program;
system/network administrators; organizational personnel responsible for information
security; system developers; organizational personnel installing, configuring, and/or
maintaining the system; organizational personnel responsible for monitoring the system
and/or network].
Test: [SELECT FROM: Mechanisms supporting and/or implementing a threat hunting program;
mechanisms supporting and/or implementing a system monitoring capability; mechanisms
supporting and/or implementing the discovery, collection, distribution, and use of indicators
of compromise].
3.11.3e ENHANCED SECURITY REQUIREMENT
Employ advanced automation and analytics capabilities in support of analysts to predict
and identify risks to organizations, systems, and system components.
ASSESSMENT OBJECTIVE
Determine if:
3.11.3e[a] Advanced automation and analytics capabilities to predict and identify
risks to organizations, systems, and system components are identified.
3.11.3e[b] Analysts to predict and identify risks to organizations, systems, and
system components are identified.
3.11.3e[c] Advanced automation and analytics capabilities are employed in support
of analysts to predict and identify risks to organizations, systems, and
system components.
POTENTIAL ASSESSMENT METHODS AND OBJECTS
Examine: [SELECT FROM: System and information integrity policy; risk assessment policy; security
planning policy and procedures; procedures addressing organizational assessments of risk;
procedures addressing system monitoring; enterprise architecture documentation; system
design documentation; system architecture and configuration documentation; system
monitoring tools and techniques documentation; system configuration settings and
associated documentation; system monitoring logs or records; system audit records;
security plan; risk assessment artifacts; risk assessment results; risk assessment reviews;
risk assessment updates; other relevant documents or records].
Interview: [SELECT FROM: Organizational personnel responsible for information security;
organizational personnel responsible for risk assessments; risk analysts; system
developers; organizational personnel installing, configuring, and/or maintaining the
system; organizational personnel responsible for monitoring; system/network
administrators].
Test: [SELECT FROM: Automated mechanisms supporting and/or implementing risk analytics
capabilities; automated mechanisms supporting and/or implementing system monitoring
capability; automated mechanisms supporting and/or implementing the discovery, collection,
distribution, and use of indicators of compromise; automated mechanisms for conducting,
documenting, reviewing, disseminating, and updating risk assessments].
3.11.4e ENHANCED SECURITY REQUIREMENT
Document or reference in the system security plan the security solution selected, the
rationale for the security solution, and the risk determination.
ASSESSMENT OBJECTIVE
Determine if:
3.11.4e[a] The system security plan documents or references the security solution
selected.
3.11.4e[b] The system security plan documents or references the rationale for the
security solution.
3.11.4e[c] The system security plan documents or references the risk determination.
POTENTIAL ASSESSMENT METHODS AND OBJECTS
Examine: [SELECT FROM: system security plan; records of security plan reviews and updates; system
design documentation; security planning policy; procedures addressing security plan
development; procedures addressing security plan reviews and updates; enterprise
architecture documentation; enterprise security architecture documentation; system
interconnection security agreements and other information exchange agreements; other
relevant documents or records].
Interview: [SELECT FROM: Organizational personnel responsible for information security;
organizational personnel responsible for developing, implementing, or approving system
interconnection and information exchange agreements; personnel managing the systems
to which the Interconnection Security Agreement/Information Exchange Agreement
applies; system developers; organizational personnel responsible for security planning
and plan implementation; organizational personnel responsible for boundary protection;
system developers; system/network administrators].
Test: [SELECT FROM: Organizational processes for security plan development, review, update, and
approval].
3.11.5e ENHANCED SECURITY REQUIREMENT
Assess the effectiveness of security solutions [Assignment: organization-defined
frequency] to address anticipated risk to organizational systems and the organization
based on current and accumulated threat intelligence.
ASSESSMENT OBJECTIVE
Determine if:
3.11.5e_ODP[1] The frequency to assess the effectiveness of security solutions is
defined.
3.11.5e[a] Security solutions are identified.
3.11.5e[b] Current and accumulated threat intelligence is identified.
3.11.5e[c] Anticipated risk to organizational systems and the organization based
on current and accumulated threat intelligence is identified.
3.11.5e[d] The effectiveness of security solutions is assessed <3.11.5e_ODP[1]:
frequency> to address anticipated risk to organizational systems and the
organization based on current and accumulated threat intelligence.
POTENTIAL ASSESSMENT METHODS AND OBJECTS
Examine: [SELECT FROM: Risk assessment policy; security planning policy and procedures; security
assessment policy and procedures; security assessment plans; security assessment results;
procedures addressing organizational assessments of risk; security plan; risk assessment;
risk assessment results; risk assessment reviews; risk assessment updates; threat
intelligence information; other relevant documents or records].
Interview: [SELECT FROM: Organizational personnel responsible for security assessments;
organizational personnel responsible for risk assessments; organizational personnel
responsible for threat analysis; organizational personnel responsible for information
security].
Test: [SELECT FROM: Mechanisms supporting, conducting, documenting, reviewing, disseminating,
and updating risk assessments; mechanisms supporting and/or implementing security
assessments].
3.11.6e ENHANCED SECURITY REQUIREMENT
Assess, respond to, and monitor supply chain risks associated with organizational systems
and system components.
ASSESSMENT OBJECTIVE
Determine if:
3.11.6e[a] Supply chain risks associated with organizational systems and system
components are identified.
3.11.6e[b] Supply chain risks associated with organizational systems and system
components are assessed.
3.11.6e[c] Supply chain risks associated with organizational systems and system
components are responded to.
3.11.6e[d] Supply chain risks associated with organizational systems and system
components are monitored.
POTENTIAL ASSESSMENT METHODS AND OBJECTS
Examine: [SELECT FROM: Risk assessment policy; procedures addressing organizational assessments
of risk; security planning policy and procedures; supply chain risk management plan;
security plan; risk assessment; risk assessment results; risk assessment reviews; risk
assessment updates; threat intelligence information; other relevant documents or
records].
Interview: [SELECT FROM: Organizational personnel responsible for information security;
organizational personnel responsible for risk assessments; organizational personnel
responsible for supply chain risk management].
Test: [SELECT FROM: Mechanisms supporting, conducting, documenting, reviewing, disseminating,
and updating risk assessments].
3.11.7e ENHANCED SECURITY REQUIREMENT
Develop a plan for managing supply chain risks associated with organizational systems and
system components; update the plan [Assignment: organization-defined frequency].
ASSESSMENT OBJECTIVE
Determine if:
3.11.7e_ODP[1] The frequency for updating the supply chain risk management plan is
defined.
3.11.7e[a] Supply chain risks associated with organizational systems and system
components are identified.
3.11.7e[b] Organizational systems and system components to include in a supply
chain risk management plan are identified.
3.11.7e[c] A plan for managing supply chain risks associated with organizational
systems and system components is developed.
3.11.7e[d] The plan for managing supply chain risks is updated <3.11.7e_ODP[1]:
frequency>.
POTENTIAL ASSESSMENT METHODS AND OBJECTS
Examine: [SELECT FROM: Risk assessment policy; supply chain risk management plan; security
planning policy and procedures; procedures addressing organizational assessments of risk;
security plan; risk assessment; risk assessment results; risk assessment reviews; risk
assessment updates; threat intelligence information; other relevant documents or
records].
Interview: [SELECT FROM: Organizational personnel responsible for information security;
organizational personnel responsible for risk assessments; organizational personnel
responsible for supply chain risk management].
Test: [SELECT FROM: Automated mechanisms supporting, conducting, documenting, reviewing,
disseminating, and updating risk assessments].
3.12 SECURITY ASSESSMENT
3.12.1e ENHANCED SECURITY REQUIREMENT
Conduct penetration testing [Assignment: organization-defined frequency], leveraging
automated scanning tools and ad hoc tests using subject matter experts.
ASSESSMENT OBJECTIVE
Determine if:
3.12.1e_ODP[1] The frequency to conduct penetration testing is defined.
3.12.1e[a] Automated scanning tools are identified.
3.12.1e[b] Ad hoc tests using subject matter experts are identified.
3.12.1e[c] Penetration testing is conducted <3.12.1e_ODP[1]: frequency>
leveraging automated scanning tools and ad hoc tests using subject
matter experts.
POTENTIAL ASSESSMENT METHODS AND OBJECTS
Examine: [SELECT FROM: Security assessment policy; procedures addressing penetration testing;
security plan; security assessment plan; penetration test report; security assessment
report; security assessment evidence; other relevant documents or records].
Interview: [SELECT FROM: Organizational personnel responsible for security assessments;
penetration testing team; system/network administrators; organizational personnel
responsible for information security].
Test: [SELECT FROM: Automated mechanisms supporting security assessments; automated
mechanisms supporting penetration testing].
3.13 SYSTEM AND COMMUNICATIONS PROTECTION
3.13.1e ENHANCED SECURITY REQUIREMENT
Create diversity in [Assignment: organization-defined system components] to reduce the
extent of malicious code propagation.
ASSESSMENT OBJECTIVE
Determine if:
3.13.1e_ODP[1] System components that require diversity are defined.
3.13.1e[a] Diversity in <3.13.1e_ODP[1]: system components> is created to reduce
the extent of malicious code propagation.
POTENTIAL ASSESSMENT METHODS AND OBJECTS
Examine: [SELECT FROM: Security planning policy; procedures addressing information security
architecture development; procedures addressing information security architecture
reviews and updates; enterprise architecture documentation; information security
architecture documentation; security plan; security CONOPS for the system; records of
information security architecture reviews and updates; system and communications
protection policy; system design documentation; system component inventory; list of
technologies deployed in the system; acquisition documentation; acquisition contracts for
system components or services; system audit records; system and services acquisition
policy; enterprise architecture policy; procedures addressing developer security
architecture and design specification for the system; solicitation documentation; servicelevel agreements; design specification and security architecture documentation for the
system; other relevant documents or records].
Interview: [SELECT FROM: Organizational personnel responsible for information security;
organizational personnel responsible for information security architecture design and
development; organizational personnel responsible for system acquisition, development,
and implementation; system/network administrators; system developers].
Test: [SELECT FROM: Mechanisms supporting and/or implementing the development, review, and
update of the information security architecture; mechanisms supporting and/or implementing
employment of a diverse set of information technologies].
3.13.2e ENHANCED SECURITY REQUIREMENT
Implement the following changes to organizational systems and system components to
introduce a degree of unpredictability into operations: [Assignment: organization-defined
changes and frequency of changes by system and system component].
ASSESSMENT OBJECTIVE
Determine if:
3.13.2e_ODP[1] Changes to organizational systems and system components to
introduce a degree of unpredictability into operations are defined.
3.13.2e_ODP[2] The frequency of changes by system and system components is
defined.
3.13.2e[a] Organizational systems and system components necessitating
unpredictability are identified.
3.13.2e[b] <3.13.2e_ODP[1]: changes> to organizational systems and system
components are implemented <3.13.2e_ODP[2]: frequency> to
introduce a degree of unpredictability into operations.
POTENTIAL ASSESSMENT METHODS AND OBJECTS
Examine: [SELECT FROM: System and communications protection policy; procedures addressing
concealment and misdirection techniques for the system; system design documentation;
security plan; system configuration settings and associated documentation; system
change control documentation; system architecture documentation; list of techniques to
be employed to introduce randomness into organizational operations and assets; system
audit records; other relevant documents or records].
Interview: [SELECT FROM: Organizational personnel responsible for information security;
organizational personnel responsible for change management; organizational personnel
responsible for implementing concealment and misdirection techniques for systems;
system/network administrators].
Test: [SELECT FROM: Mechanisms supporting and/or implementing randomness as a concealment
and misdirection technique; mechanisms supporting and/or implementing change control for
the system].
3.13.3e ENHANCED SECURITY REQUIREMENT
Employ [Assignment: organization-defined technical and procedural means] to confuse
and mislead adversaries.
ASSESSMENT OBJECTIVE
Determine if:
3.13.3e_ODP[1] Technical and procedural means to confuse and mislead adversaries
are defined.
3.13.3e[a] <3.13.3e_ODP[1]: technical and procedural means> are employed to
confuse and mislead adversaries.
POTENTIAL ASSESSMENT METHODS AND OBJECTS
Examine: [SELECT FROM: System and communications protection policy; procedures addressing
concealment and misdirection techniques for the system; list of concealment and
misdirection techniques to be employed for organizational systems; system design
documentation; procedures addressing the use of honeypots; security plan; system
configuration settings and associated documentation; system design documentation;
system architecture; list of techniques to be employed to introduce randomness into
organizational operations and assets; system audit records; other relevant documents or
records].
Interview: [SELECT FROM: Organizational personnel responsible for information security; system
developers; system/network administrators; organizational personnel responsible for
implementing concealment and misdirection techniques for systems].
Test: [SELECT FROM: Mechanisms supporting and/or implementing the concealment or
randomization of communications patterns; mechanisms supporting and/or implementing
alternative physical safeguards; mechanisms supporting and/or implementing honey pots;
mechanisms supporting and/or implementing concealment and misdirection techniques].
3.13.4e ENHANCED SECURITY REQUIREMENT
Employ [Selection: (one or more): [Assignment: organization-defined physical isolation
techniques]; [Assignment: organization-defined logical isolation techniques]] in
organizational systems and system components.
ASSESSMENT OBJECTIVE
Determine if:
3.13.4e_ODP[1] One or more of the following is/are selected: physical isolation
techniques; logical isolation techniques.
3.13.4e_ODP[2] Physical isolation techniques are defined. (If selected in
3.13.4e_ODP[1])
3.13.4e_ODP[3] Logical isolation techniques are defined. (If selected in
3.13.4e_ODP[1])
3.13.4e[a] <3.13.4e_ODP[2]: physical isolation techniques and/or 3.13.4e_ODP[3]
logical isolation techniques> are employed in organizational systems
and system components.
POTENTIAL ASSESSMENT METHODS AND OBJECTS
Examine: [SELECT FROM: System and communications protection policy; procedures addressing
boundary protection; system design documentation; procedures addressing the use of
thin nodes; list of key internal boundaries of the system; security plan; boundary
protection hardware and software; system configuration settings and associated
documentation; enterprise architecture documentation; system architecture; security
architecture documentation; system audit records; system component inventory; list of
security tools and support components to be isolated from other system components;
other relevant documents or records].
Interview: [SELECT FROM: Organizational personnel responsible for information security;
system/network administrators; system developers; organizational personnel responsible
for boundary protection].
Test: [SELECT FROM: Mechanisms implementing the boundary protection capability; mechanisms
implementing physical isolation techniques; mechanisms supporting and/or implementing the
isolation of information security tools, mechanisms, and support components; mechanisms
supporting and/or implementing the capability to separate system components supporting
organizational missions and business functions; mechanisms implementing logical isolation
techniques; mechanisms supporting or implementing separate network addresses/different
subnets; mechanisms supporting and/or implementing thin nodes].
3.13.5e ENHANCED SECURITY REQUIREMENT
Distribute and relocate the following system functions or resources [Assignment:
organization-defined frequency]: [Assignment: organization-defined system functions or
resources].
ASSESSMENT OBJECTIVE
Determine if:
3.13.5e_ODP[1] System functions or resources to distribute and relocate are defined.
3.13.5e_ODP[2] Frequency to distribute and relocate system functions or resources is
defined.
3.13.5e[a] <3.13.5e_ODP[1]: system functions or resources> are distributed and
relocated <3.13.5e_ODP[2]: frequency>.
POTENTIAL ASSESSMENT METHODS AND OBJECTS
Examine: [SELECT FROM: System and communications protection policy; security plan; configuration
management policy and procedures; procedures addressing concealment and
misdirection techniques for the system; list of processing/storage locations to be changed
at organizational time intervals; system component inventory; change control records;
configuration management records; system audit records; other relevant documents or
records].
Interview: [SELECT FROM: Organizational personnel responsible for information security;
organizational personnel responsible for changing processing and/or storage locations;
system/network administrators].
Test: [SELECT FROM: Mechanisms supporting and/or implementing changing processing and/or
storage locations].
3.14 SYSTEM AND INFORMATION INTEGRITY
3.14.1e ENHANCED SECURITY REQUIREMENT
Verify the integrity of [Assignment: organization-defined security critical or essential
software] using root of trust mechanisms or cryptographic signatures.
ASSESSMENT OBJECTIVE
Determine if:
3.14.1e_ODP[1] Security critical or essential software is defined.
3.14.1e[a] Root of trust mechanisms or cryptographic signatures are identified.
3.14.1e[b] The integrity of <3.14.1e_ODP[1]: security critical or essential
software> is verified using root of trust mechanisms or cryptographic
signatures.
POTENTIAL ASSESSMENT METHODS AND OBJECTS
Examine: [SELECT FROM: System and information integrity policy; procedures addressing software,
firmware, and information integrity; system design documentation; security plan; system
configuration settings and associated documentation; system component inventory;
integrity verification tools and associated documentation; records of integrity verification
scans; system audit records; cryptographic mechanisms and associated documentation;
records of detected unauthorized changes to software, firmware, and information; other
relevant documents or records].
Interview: [SELECT FROM: Organizational personnel responsible for information security;
organizational personnel responsible for software, firmware, and/or information
integrity; system developers; system/network administrators].
Test: [SELECT FROM: Software, firmware, and information integrity verification tools; mechanisms
supporting and/or implementing integrity verification of the boot process; mechanisms
supporting and/or implementing protection of the integrity of boot firmware; cryptographic
mechanisms implementing software, firmware, and information integrity; safeguards
implementing protection of the integrity of boot firmware].
3.14.2e ENHANCED SECURITY REQUIREMENT
Monitor organizational systems and system components on an ongoing basis for
anomalous or suspicious behavior.
ASSESSMENT OBJECTIVE
Determine if:
3.14.2e[a] Anomalous or suspicious behavior is defined.
3.14.2e[b] Organizational systems and system components are monitored on an
ongoing basis for anomalous or suspicious behavior.
POTENTIAL ASSESSMENT METHODS AND OBJECTS
Examine: [SELECT FROM: Audit and accountability policy; procedures addressing audit review,
analysis, and reporting; procedures addressing physical access monitoring; system design
documentation; documentation providing evidence of correlated information obtained
from audit records and physical access monitoring records; system configuration settings
and associated documentation; procedures addressing system monitoring tools and
techniques; system monitoring logs or records; system and information integrity policy;
system monitoring tools and techniques documentation; system configuration settings
and associated documentation; system protocols; system audit records; security plan;
system component inventory; records of actions taken to terminate suspicious events;
alerts/notifications generated based on detected suspicious events; network diagram;
system monitoring logs or records; list of profiles representing common traffic patterns
and/or events; system protocols documentation; list of acceptable thresholds for false
positives and false negatives; list of individuals who have been identified as posing an
increased level of risk; list of privileged users; other relevant documents or records].
Interview: [SELECT FROM: Organizational personnel responsible for audit review, analysis, and
reporting; organizational personnel responsible for information security; organizational
personnel responsible for physical access monitoring; organizational personnel
responsible for installing, configuring, and/or maintaining the system; organizational
personnel responsible for monitoring the system; organizational personnel responsible
for the intrusion detection system; system/network administrators].
Test: [SELECT FROM: Mechanisms supporting and/or implementing the system monitoring
capability; mechanisms supporting and/or implementing actions to terminate suspicious
events; mechanisms supporting and/or implementing the monitoring of inbound/outbound
communications traffic; mechanisms implementing the capability to correlate information
from audit records with information from monitoring physical access; mechanisms supporting
and/or implementing notifications to incident response personnel; mechanisms supporting
and/or implementing analysis of outbound communications traffic; mechanisms supporting
and/or implementing analysis of communications traffic/event patterns].
3.14.3e ENHANCED SECURITY REQUIREMENT
Ensure that [Assignment: organization-defined systems and system components] are
included in the scope of the specified enhanced security requirements or are segregated
in purpose-specific networks.
ASSESSMENT OBJECTIVE
Determine if:
3.14.3e_ODP[1] Systems and system components included in the scope of the specified
enhanced security requirements are identified.
3.14.3e[a] <3.14.3e_ODP[1]: systems and system components> are included in the
scope of the specified enhanced security requirements.
3.14.3e[b] Systems and system components that are not included in
<3.14.3e_ODP[1]: systems and system components> are segregated in
purpose-specific networks.
POTENTIAL ASSESSMENT METHODS AND OBJECTS
Examine: [SELECT FROM: Access control policy; information flow control policies; system and
services acquisition policy; system and communications protection policy; procedures
addressing security function isolation; procedures addressing application partitioning;
procedures addressing security engineering principles used in the specification, design,
development, implementation, and modification of the system; procedures addressing
information flow enforcement; procedures addressing access enforcement; system
architecture; system design documentation; security plan; system component inventory;
system configuration settings and associated documentation; system baseline
configuration; list of security functions to be isolated from non-security functions; system
audit records; security requirements and specifications for the system; list of approved
authorizations (user privileges); list of information flow authorizations; other relevant
documents or records].
Interview: [SELECT FROM: Organizational personnel responsible for access enforcement;
system/network administrators; organizational personnel responsible for information
security; system developers; system integrators; organizational personnel responsible for
acquisition/contracting; organizational personnel responsible for determining system
security requirements; system security architects; enterprise architects; organizational
personnel responsible for system specification, design, development, implementation,
and modification].
Test: [SELECT FROM: Mechanisms implementing the access control policy; mechanisms
implementing the information flow enforcement policy; mechanisms supporting the
application of security engineering principles in system specification, design, development,
implementation, and modification].
3.14.4e ENHANCED SECURITY REQUIREMENT
Refresh [Assignment: organization-defined systems and system components] from a
known, trusted state [Assignment: organization-defined frequency].
ASSESSMENT OBJECTIVE
Determine if:
3.14.4e_ODP[1] Systems and system components to refresh from a known, trusted
state are defined.
3.14.4e_ODP[2] The frequency to refresh systems and systems components is defined.
3.14.4e[a] A known, trusted state is identified for <3.14.4e_ODP[1]: systems and
system components>.
3.14.4e[b] <3.14.4e_ODP[1]: systems and system components> are refreshed from
a known, trusted state <ODP-3.14.e[2]: frequency>.
POTENTIAL ASSESSMENT METHODS AND OBJECTS
Examine: [SELECT FROM: System and information integrity policy; procedures addressing non-persistence for system components and information; system design documentation;
security plan; system component inventory; system configuration settings and associated
documentation; system audit records; other relevant documents or records].
Interview: [SELECT FROM: Organizational personnel responsible for information security;
organizational personnel responsible for non-persistence; system/network
administrators; system developers].
Test: [SELECT FROM: Mechanisms supporting and/or implementing the initiation and termination of
non-persistent components; mechanisms supporting and/or implementing component and
service refreshes].
3.14.5e ENHANCED SECURITY REQUIREMENT
Conduct reviews of persistent organizational storage locations [Assignment: organization-defined frequency] and remove CUI that is no longer needed.
ASSESSMENT OBJECTIVE
Determine if:
3.14.5e_ODP[1] The frequency with which to conduct reviews of persistent
organizational storage locations is defined.
3.14.5e[a] Persistent organizational storage locations are identified.
3.14.5e[b] Reviews of persistent organizational storage locations are conducted
<3.14.5e_ODP[1]: frequency> to identify CUI that is no longer needed.
3.14.5e[c] CUI that is no longer needed is removed.
POTENTIAL ASSESSMENT METHODS AND OBJECTS
Examine: [SELECT FROM: System and communications protection policy; procedures addressing the
protection of information at rest; system and information integrity policy; procedures
addressing non-persistence for system components; system audit records; system design
documentation; system configuration settings and associated documentation; security
plan; cryptographic mechanisms and associated configuration documentation; offline
storage locations for information at rest; system audit records; other relevant documents
or records].
Interview: [SELECT FROM: System/network administrators; system developers; organizational
personnel responsible for non-persistence; organizational personnel responsible for
information security].
Test: [SELECT FROM: Mechanisms supporting and/or implementing the removal of information from
online storage; mechanisms supporting and/or implementing the storage of information
offline; mechanisms supporting and/or implementing the initiation and termination of nonpersistent components].
3.14.6e ENHANCED SECURITY REQUIREMENT
Use threat indicator information and effective mitigations obtained from [Assignment:
organization-defined external organizations] to guide and inform intrusion detection and
threat hunting.
ASSESSMENT OBJECTIVE
Determine if:
3.14.6e_ODP[1] External organizations from which to obtain threat indicator
information and effective mitigations are defined.
3.14.6e[a] Threat indicator information is identified.
3.14.6e[b] Effective mitigations are identified.
3.14.6e[c] Intrusion detection approaches are identified.
3.14.6e[d] Threat hunting activities are identified.
3.14.6e[e] Threat indicator information and effective mitigations obtained from
<3.14.6e_ODP[1]: external organizations> are used to guide and inform
intrusion detection and threat hunting.
POTENTIAL ASSESSMENT METHODS AND OBJECTS
Examine: [SELECT FROM: System and information integrity policy; information security program
plan; procedures addressing security alerts, advisories, and directives; threat awareness
program documentation; procedures addressing system monitoring; procedures for the
threat awareness program; risk assessment results relevant to threat awareness; records
of security alerts and advisories; system design documentation; security plan; system
monitoring tools and techniques documentation; system configuration settings and
associated documentation; system monitoring logs or records; system audit records;
documentation on the cross-organization information-sharing capability; other relevant
documents or records].
Interview: [SELECT FROM: Organizational personnel responsible for information security program
planning and plan implementation; system/network administrators; organizational
personnel responsible for the threat awareness program; organizational personnel
responsible for the cross-organization information-sharing capability; organizational
personnel responsible for information security; organizational personnel responsible for
installing, configuring, and/or maintaining the system; organizational personnel
responsible for monitoring system hosts; organizational personnel responsible for
security alerts and advisories; organizational personnel responsible for implementing,
operating, maintaining, and using the system; organizational personnel, organizational
elements, and/or external organizations to whom alerts, advisories, and directives are to
be disseminated; personnel with whom threat awareness information is shared by the
organization; system developers].
Test: [SELECT FROM: Mechanisms supporting and/or implementing the threat awareness program;
mechanisms supporting and/or implementing the cross-organization information-sharing
capability; mechanisms supporting and/or implementing the system monitoring capability;
mechanisms supporting and/or implementing the definition, receipt, generation, and
dissemination of security alerts, advisories, and directives; mechanisms supporting and/or
implementing security directives; mechanisms supporting and/or implementing threat
hunting; mechanisms supporting and/or implementing intrusion detection; mechanisms
supporting and/or implementing the discovery, collection, distribution, and use of indicators
of compromise].
3.14.7e ENHANCED SECURITY REQUIREMENT
Verify the correctness of [Assignment: organization-defined security critical or essential
software, firmware, and hardware components] using [Assignment: organization-defined
verification methods or techniques].
ASSESSMENT OBJECTIVE
Determine if:
3.14.7e_ODP[1] Security critical or essential software components for which to verify
correctness are defined.
3.14.7e_ODP[2] Security critical or essential firmware components for which to verify
correctness are defined.
3.14.7e_ODP[3] Security critical or essential hardware components for which to verify
correctness are defined.
3.14.7e_ODP[4] Verification methods or techniques are defined.
3.14.7e[a] The correctness of <3.14.7e_ODP[1]: security critical or essential
software components> is verified using <3.14.7e_ODP[4]: verification
methods or techniques>.
3.14.7e[b] The correctness of <3.14.7e_ODP[2]: security critical or essential
firmware components> is verified using <3.14.7e_ODP[4]: verification
methods or techniques>.
3.14.7e[c] The correctness of <3.14.7e_ODP[3]: security critical or essential
hardware components> is verified using <3.14.7e_ODP[4]: verification
methods or techniques>.
POTENTIAL ASSESSMENT METHODS AND OBJECTS
Examine: [SELECT FROM: System and services acquisition policy; enterprise architecture policy;
procedures addressing developer security architecture and design specifications for the
system; solicitation documentation; acquisition documentation; service-level agreements;
acquisition contracts for the system, system component, or system service; design
specification and security architecture documentation for the system; system design
documentation; security plan; system component inventory; system configuration settings
and associated documentation; other relevant documents or records].
Interview: [SELECT FROM: Organizational personnel responsible for system and services acquisition;
organizational personnel responsible for information security; system developers;
organizational personnel responsible for security architecture and design].
Test: [SELECT FROM: Mechanisms supporting and/or implementing integrity verification methods or
techniques].