Executive Summary
Electronic mail (email) is perhaps the most popularly used system for exchanging business information
over the Internet (or any other computer network). At the most basic level, the email process can be
divided into two principal components: (1) mail servers, which are hosts that deliver, forward, and store
email; and (2) mail clients, which interface with users and allow users to read, compose, send, and store
email. This document addresses the security issues of mail servers and mail clients, including Web-based
access to mail.
Mail servers and user workstations running mail clients are frequently targeted by attackers. Because the
computing and networking technologies that underlie email are ubiquitous and well-understood by many,
attackers are able to develop attack methods to exploit security weaknesses. Mail servers are also
targeted because they (and public Web servers) must communicate to some degree with untrusted third
parties. Additionally, mail clients have been targeted as an effective means of inserting malware into
machines and of propagating this code to other machines. As a result, mail servers, mail clients, and the
network infrastructure that supports them must be protected. Examples of email security issues include
the following:
• To exchange email with the outside world, a requirement for most organizations, it is allowed through
organizations' network perimeter defenses. At a basic level, viruses and other types of malware may
be distributed throughout an organization via email. Increasingly, however, attackers are getting
more sophisticated and using email to deliver targeted zero-day attacks in an attempt to compromise
users' workstations within the organization's internal network.
• Given email's nature of human to human communication, it can be used as a social engineering
vehicle. Email can allow an attacker to exploit an organization's users to gather information or get
the users to perform actions that further an attack.
• Flaws in the mail server application may be used as the means of compromising the underlying server
and hence the attached network. Examples of this unauthorized access include gaining access to files
or folders that were not meant to be publicly accessible, and being able to execute commands and/or
install software on the mail server.
• Denial of service (DoS) attacks may be directed to the mail server or its support network
infrastructure, denying or hindering valid users from using the mail server.
• Sensitive information on the mail server may be read by unauthorized individuals or changed in an
unauthorized manner.
• Sensitive information transmitted unencrypted between mail server and client may be intercepted.
All popular email communication standards default to sending usernames, passwords, and email
messages unencrypted.
• Information within email messages may be altered at some point between the sender and recipient.
• Malicious entities may gain unauthorized access to resources elsewhere in the organization's network
via a successful attack on the mail server. For example, once the mail server is compromised, an
attacker could retrieve users' passwords, which may grant the attacker access to other hosts on the
organization's network.
• Malicious entities may attack external organizations from a successful attack on a mail server host. 
• Misconfiguration may allow malicious entities to use the organization's mail server to send email-based advertisements (i.e., spam).
• Users may send inappropriate, proprietary, or other sensitive information via email. This could
expose the organization to legal action.
This document is intended to assist organizations in installing, configuring, and maintaining secure mail
servers and mail clients. More specifically, this document discusses the following items in detail:
• Email standards and their security implications
• Email message signing and encryption standards
• Planning and management of mail servers
• Securing the operating system underlying a mail server
• Mail server application security
• Email content filtering
• Email-specific considerations in the deployment and configuration of network protection
mechanisms, such as firewalls, routers, switches, and intrusion detection and intrusion prevention
systems
• Securing mail clients
• Administering the mail server in a secure manner, including backups, security testing, and log
reviews.
The following key guidelines are recommended to Federal departments and agencies for maintaining a
secure mail server.
Organizations should carefully plan and address the security aspects of the deployment of a mail
server.
As it is much more difficult to address security once deployment and implementation have occurred,
security should be considered from the initial planning stage. Organizations are more likely to make
decisions about configuring computers appropriately and consistently when they develop and use a
detailed, well-designed deployment plan. Developing such a plan will support mail server administrators
in making the inevitable tradeoff decisions between usability, performance, and risk.
Organizations often fail to take into consideration the human resource requirements for both deployment
and operational phases of the mail server and supporting infrastructure. Organizations should address the
following points in a deployment plan:
• Types of personnel required (e.g., system and mail server administrators, network administrators,
information systems security officers)
• Skills and training required by assigned personnel
• Availability of personnel. 
Organizations should implement appropriate security management practices and controls when
maintaining and operating a secure mail server.
Appropriate management practices are essential to operating and maintaining a secure mail server.
Security practices entail the identification of an organization's information system assets and the
development, documentation, and implementation of policies, standards, procedures, and guidelines that
help to ensure the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of information system resources.
To ensure the security of a mail server and the supporting network infrastructure, the following practices
should be implemented:
• Organization-wide information system security policy
• Configuration/change control and management
• Risk assessment and management
• Standardized software configurations that satisfy the information system security policy
• Security awareness and training
• Contingency, continuity of operations, and disaster recovery planning
• Certification and accreditation.
Organizations should ensure that the mail server operating system is deployed, configured, and
managed to meet the security requirements of the organization.
The first step in securing a mail server is securing the underlying operating system. Most commonly
available mail servers operate on a general-purpose operating system. Many security issues can be
avoided if the operating systems underlying mail servers are configured appropriately. Default hardware
and software configurations are typically set by manufacturers to emphasize features, functions, and ease
of use at the expense of security. Because manufacturers are not aware of each organization's security
needs, each mail server administrator must configure new servers to reflect their organization's security
requirements and reconfigure them as those requirements change. Using security configuration guides or
checklists can assist administrators in securing systems consistently and efficiently. Securing an
operating system would generally include the following steps:
• Patching and updating the operating system
• Removing or disabling unnecessary services and applications
• Configuring operating system user authentication
• Configuring resource controls
• Installing and configuring additional security controls, if needed
• Performing security tests on the operating system.
Organizations should ensure that the mail server application is deployed, configured, and managed
to meet the security requirements of the organization.
In many respects, the secure installation and configuration of the mail server application mirrors the
operating system process discussed above. The overarching principle, as before, is to install the minimal 
mail server services required and eliminate any known vulnerabilities through patches or upgrades. If the
installation program installs any unnecessary applications, services, or scripts, they should be removed
immediately after the installation process completes. Securing the mail server application would
generally include the following steps:
• Patch and upgrade the mail server application
• Remove or disable unnecessary services, applications, and sample content
• Configure mail server user authentication and access controls
• Configure mail server resource controls
• Test the security of the mail server application.
Organizations should consider the implementation of cryptographic technologies to protect user
authentication and email data.
Most standard email protocols default to unencrypted user authentication and send email data in the clear
(unencrypted). Sending this data in the clear may allow an attacker to easily compromise a user account
and/or intercept and alter unencrypted emails. At a minimum, most organizations should encrypt the user
authentication session even if they do not encrypt the email data itself. Encrypted user authentication is
now supported by most standard and proprietary mailbox protocols.
The issues involved with encrypted and signed email data are more complex. Encrypting and signing
email places a greater load on the organization's network infrastructure, may complicate malware
scanning and email content filtering, and often requires significant administrative overhead. However, for
many organizations the benefits of email encryption and signatures will outweigh the costs.
Organizations should employ their network infrastructure to protect their mail server(s).
The network infrastructure (e.g., firewalls, routers, intrusion detection systems) that supports the mail
server plays a critical role in the security of the mail server. In most configurations, the network
infrastructure will be the first line of defense between the Internet and a mail server. Network design
alone, however, cannot protect a mail server. The frequency, sophistication, and variety of mail server
attacks perpetrated today support the idea that mail server security must be implemented through layered
and diverse protection mechanisms.
Organizations should ensure that the mail clients are deployed, configured, and used properly to
meet the security requirements of the organization.
In many respects, the client side of email represents a greater risk to security than the mail server.
Numerous issues need to be carefully considered and addressed to provide an appropriate level of security
for mail clients. Securely installing, configuring, and using mail client applications would generally
include the following steps:
• Patch and upgrade the mail client applications
• Configure mail client security features, such as disabling automatic opening of messages and enabling
anti-spam and anti-phishing features
• Configure mailbox authentication and access 
• Secure the client host's operating system.
Maintaining the security of a mail server is an ongoing process.
Maintaining a secure mail server requires constant effort, resources, and vigilance from an organization.
Securely administering a mail server on a daily basis is an essential aspect of mail server security.
Maintaining the security of a mail server will usually involve the following steps:
• Configuring, protecting, and analyzing log files
• Backing up data frequently
• Protecting against malware (e.g., viruses, worms, Trojan horses)
• Establishing and following procedures for recovering from compromise
• Testing and applying patches in a timely manner
• Testing security periodically.
1. Introduction
1.1 Authority
The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) developed this document in furtherance of its
statutory responsibilities under the Federal Information Security Management Act (FISMA) of 2002,
Public Law 107-347.
NIST is responsible for developing standards and guidelines, including minimum requirements, for
providing adequate information security for all agency operations and assets, but such standards and
guidelines shall not apply to national security systems. This guideline is consistent with the requirements
of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-130, Section 8b(3), "Securing Agency
Information Systems," as analyzed in A-130, Appendix IV: Analysis of Key Sections. Supplemental
information is provided in A-130, Appendix III.
This guideline has been prepared for use by Federal agencies. It may be used by nongovernmental
organizations on a voluntary basis and is not subject to copyright, though attribution is desired.
Nothing in this document should be taken to contradict standards and guidelines made mandatory and
binding on Federal agencies by the Secretary of Commerce under statutory authority, nor should these
guidelines be interpreted as altering or superseding the existing authorities of the Secretary of Commerce,
Director of the OMB, or any other Federal official.
1.2 Purpose and Scope
The purpose of the Guidelines on Electronic Mail Security is to recommend security practices for
designing, implementing, and operating email systems on public and private networks. While intended as
recommended guidance for Federal departments and agencies, it may be used in the private sector on a
voluntary basis.
Mail servers are frequently targeted by attackers. Various types of email content and attachments have
also proven to be effective in introducing viruses and other malware into networks through mail clients.
Email is extensively used as a vector to deliver attacks that exploit vulnerabilities in users' workstations
or use social engineering methods to trick users. These attacks often lead to the compromise of the user
workstation or the release of sensitive information even when the email client is securely configured.
This document may be used by organizations interested in enhancing security on existing and future mail
systems to reduce the number and frequency of email-related security incidents. This document presents
generic principles that apply to all systems.
This guideline does not cover the following aspects relating to securing a mail server:
• Securing other types of network servers
• Firewalls and routers used to protect mail servers beyond a basic discussion in Section 7.2.1
• Special considerations for high traffic mail servers with multiple hosts
• Securing backend servers that may support the mail server (e.g., syslog hosts, file servers)
• Security of the X.400 standard messaging protocol. 
1.3 Audience and Assumptions
The document, while technical in nature, provides the background information to help readers understand
the topics that are discussed. The intended audience for this document includes the following:
• Users when setting up mail clients and accessing email
• System engineers and architects when designing and implementing mail systems
• System administrators when administering or upgrading mail systems
• Program managers and information technology (IT) security officers to ensure that adequate security
measures have been considered for all phases of the system's life cycle.
The practices recommended in this document are designed to help mitigate the risks associated with email
and other known security problems. They build on and assume the implementation of practices described
in other NIST guidelines listed in Appendix E.
1.4 Document Organization
The remainder of this document is organized into the following eight major sections:
• Section 2 includes background information and standards relating to email.
• Section 3 contains information on protecting email messages by signing and encrypting them.
• Section 4 discusses the planning and management of a mail server.
• Section 5 presents an overview of securing the underlying operating system of a mail server.
• Section 6 discusses securing a mail server application, protecting messages traversing the server, and
securing access to mailboxes.
• Section 7 addresses protecting a mail server through the supporting network infrastructure.
• Section 8 provides information regarding mail client security.
• Section 9 discusses the basics of securely administering a mail server on a daily basis.
The document also contains several appendices with supporting material:
• Appendix A defines terms used in this document.
• Appendix B lists relevant Request for Comment (RFC) documents.
• Appendix C lists references used in this document.
• Appendix D identifies email security tools and applications.
• Appendix E lists online email security resources.
• Appendix F presents a set of mail server and client security checklists.
• Appendix G lists the acronyms used throughout the document.
• Appendix H contains the index for the document. 
2. Background and Standards
As of January 2007, the estimated number of Internet users worldwide exceeded one billion. Most of
these users have electronic mail (email) accounts on one or more mail systems, which is a huge leap from
its inception in 1971, when Ray Tomlinson, a Department of Defense (DoD) researcher, sent the first
ARPANET email message to himself. The ARPANET, precursor to the Internet, was a United States
(U.S.) Advanced Research Project Agency (ARPA) project intended to develop a set of communications
protocols to transparently connect computing resources in various geographical locations. Messaging
applications were available on ARPANET systems; however, they could only be used for sending
messages to users with local system accounts. Tomlinson modified the existing messaging system so that
users could send messages to users on other ARPANET connected systems. After Tomlinson's
modification was available to other researchers, email quickly became the most heavily used application
on the ARPANET.
As the ARPANET evolved into the Internet, email remained one of the most heavily used applications for
personal and business users. Since the ARPANET was initially a small and trusted community, there was
little need for security. The growth in the popularity of the Internet greatly increased the need for
security. Unfortunately, the needed security was lacking because early email standards and
implementations placed little emphasis on security. Maintaining compatibility with these standards
presents a great challenge in securing email today.
2.1 Background
An understanding of how email messages are composed, delivered, and stored is helpful in understanding
email security. For most email users, once a message is composed and sent, it leaves the computer and
magically appears in the intended recipient's inbox. This may seem simple but the handling and delivery
of an email message can be as complex as that involving physical mail, with processing and sorting
occurring at several intermediary locations before arriving at the final destination.
The process starts with message composition. The most basic mail clients typically ask the user to
provide the following: subject line, message content, and intended recipients. When these fields are
completed and the user sends the message, the message is transformed into a specific standard format
specified by Request for Comments (RFC) 2822, Internet Message Format. At the most basic level, the
two primary message sections are the header and the body. The header section contains the vital
information about the message including origination date, sender, recipient(s), delivery path, subject, and
format information. The body of the message contains the actual content of the message.
Once the message is translated into an RFC 2822 formatted message, it can be transmitted. Using a
network connection, the mail client, referred to as a mail user agent (MUA), connects to a mail transfer
agent (MTA) operating on the mail server. After initiating communication, the mail client provides the
sender's identity to the server. Next, using the mail server commands, the client tells the server who the
intended recipients are. Although the message contains a list of intended recipients, the mail server does
not examine the message for this information. Only after the complete recipient list is sent to the server
does the client supply the message. From this point, message delivery is under control of the mail server. 
Once the mail server is processing the message, several events occur: recipient server identification,
connection establishment, and message transmission. Using Domain Name System (DNS) services, the
sender's mail server determines the mail server(s) for the recipient(s). Then, the server opens up a
connection(s) to the recipient mail server(s) and sends the message employing a process similar to that
used by the originating client. At this point, one of two events could occur. If the sender's and
recipient's mailboxes are located on the same mail server, the message is delivered using a local delivery
agent (LDA). If the sender's and recipient's mailboxes are located on different mail servers, the send
process is repeated from one MTA to another until the message reaches the recipient's mailbox.
When the LDA has control of the message, a number of possible events may occur. Depending on the
configuration, the LDA could deliver the message or process the message based on a predefined message
filter before delivery (filtering can be based on a number of message properties and is discussed in detail
in Section 6.2.2). Once the message is delivered, it is placed in the recipient's mailbox where it is stored
until the recipient performs some action on it (e.g., read, delete) using the MUA. Figure 2.1 illustrates the
flow of the message through the various mail components discussed previously. This is the general
process of sending an email. 
2.2 Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions
RFC 2822 provides a standard for transmitting messages containing textual content; however, it does not
address messages that contain attachments, such as a mail message with a word processing document or
photo included. Making use of the headers in an RFC 2822 message, the Multipurpose Internet Mail
Extensions (MIME) provide almost endless possibilities to describe the structure of rich message content.
MIME uses the convention of content-type/subtype pairs to specify the native representation or encoding
of associated data. Examples of content types include the following:
• Audio – for transmitting audio or voice data.
• Application – used to transmit application data or binary data.
• Image – for transmitting still image (picture) data.
• Message – for encapsulating another mail message.
• Multipart – used to combine several message body parts, possibly of differing types of data, into a
single message. 
• Text – used to represent textual information in a number of character sets and formatted text
description languages in a standardized manner.
• Video – for transmitting video or moving image data, possibly with audio as part of the composite
video data format.
The current MIME standards include five parts: RFCs 2045, 2046, 2047, 4289 (which replaced 2048),
and 2049 (see Appendix B). They address message body format, media types, non-American Standard
Code for Information Interchange (non-ASCII) message header extensions, registration procedures, and
conformance criteria, respectively. With this added functionality, email features such as message
attachments and inline hypertext markup language (HTML) are possible. Although MIME extensions
allow for binary message content, such content is incorporated into an RFC 2822 message using Base64
encoding, which provides a textual representation of binary data.
2.3 Mail Transport Standards
To ensure reliability and interoperability among various mail applications, mail transport standards were
established. In the simplest scenario, an email message is sent from one local user to another local user.
For this case, an LDA is responsible for placing the message in the appropriate mailbox. When a message
is sent to non-local recipients, an MTA is needed to send the message from the local mail server to the
remote mail server. Depending on the type of systems involved, different MTAs may be used, which in
turn may support different implementations of a particular message transfer protocol or more than one
distinct transfer protocol.
The most common MTA transfer protocol is the Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP). SMTP is the
de-facto Internet standard for sending email messages. Thus, any Internet messaging system must support
SMTP to facilitate communication with other email messaging applications. Other messaging systems
exist that use different MTA transfer protocols between similar or clustered messaging systems. For the
most part, these MTAs are proprietary and work only with specific systems. Sections 2.3.1 and 2.3.2
provide background information on SMTP and SMTP extensions, while Section 2.3.3 discusses
proprietary MTAs.
2.3.1 Simple Mail Transfer Protocol
Jon Postel of the University of Southern California developed SMTP in August 1982. As RFC 821,
Simple Mail Transfer Protocol, states, "SMTP was developed to ensure a more reliable and efficient way
to transport messages." At the most basic level, SMTP is a minimal language that defines a
communications protocol for delivering email messages. Figure 2.2 lists the SMTP commands and
syntax as defined in RFC 2821, Simple Mail Transfer Protocol, which replaced RFC 821. 
When a user sends an email, the client contacts its SMTP server and conducts a "conversation" using the
SMTP language. A MUA is typically part of the mail client application (e.g., Outlook, Eudora). If an
MUA is unavailable, email messages can be sent using a Telnet client connected to the SMTP service.
Figure 2.3 depicts a sample SMTP conversation using Telnet. The Telnet and SMTP commands entered
by the user for this session are shown in bold. During a manual SMTP Telnet session, the HELP
command can be used to determine which of the SMTP commands are enabled on the server. 
2.3.2 Simple Mail Transfer Protocol Extensions
As the number of email users grew, additional functionality was sought in mail clients and SMTP servers.
For SMTP servers to support this additional functionality, extensions were added to SMTP. In 1993,
RFC 1425 introduced the concept of SMTP service extensions. Subsequently, RFC 1425 was superseded
by RFC 1651 in 1994, RFC 1869 in 1995, and RFC 2821 in 2001. These RFCs added three pieces to the
SMTP framework: 
• New SMTP commands (RFC 1425)
• Registry for SMTP service extensions (RFC 1651)
• Additional parameters for SMTP MAIL FROM and RCPT TO commands (RFC 1869).
To be compatible with older SMTP servers, there needed to be a method to allow the mail client
application to determine whether the server supported extensions. This was accomplished through the
"enhanced hello" (EHLO) command. When connecting to a server, a mail client could issue the EHLO
command. If the server supported SMTP extensions, it would give a successful response and list the
extensions that were supported. If the server did not support SMTP extensions, it would issue a command
failure response prompting the MUA to respond with the standard HELO command. Servers that support
SMTP extensions, also known as Extended SMTP (ESMTP), typically respond with ESMTP in their
banner. Figure 2.4 is an excerpt from an ESMTP server transaction involving the EHLO command. 
As depicted in Figure 2.4, the sample server supports only one extension – SIZE. Numerous extensions
are supported by a variety of SMTP servers. Table 2.1 lists some of the more common SMTP extensions
and their associated RFCs. In particular, RFC 2554 specifies a new command and protocol for
identifying and authenticating a user. The default configuration of most mail servers typically does not
have authenticated relay enabled. 
2.3.3 Proprietary Mail Transports
As mentioned previously, some messaging systems use MTAs that do not support either SMTP or
ESMTP. These types of MTAs are designed to work within a closed messaging environment. Many
large-scale government, academic, and private organizations have messaging systems that use these types
of MTAs. However, these organizations still rely on SMTP or ESMTP-capable MTAs for
communicating with external messaging systems. Some examples of messaging systems that use
proprietary protocols are MTAs for Lotus Notes and Microsoft Exchange. Discussion on the benefits
and disadvantages of using MTAs that support only proprietary message transfer protocols is outside the
scope of this document.
2.4 Client Access Standards
Once a message is delivered by the LDA, users need to access the mail server to retrieve the message.
Mail clients (MUAs) are used to access the mail server and retrieve email messages. Several methods
exist for users to access their mailboxes, the simplest being direct access.
The simplest scenario for a messaging system would be one in which all users have direct access to their
mailbox (common on hosts employing the Unix operating system). For each account that exists on the
system, there is a corresponding mailbox in that user's home directory. When messages are received,
users can use command line-based mail programs, such as mail or pine, to directly access the mailbox.
Although this method is straightforward, it requires all users accessing the mail server to receive
messages to have a user account and a command-line interface on the host operating system.
Allowing users, particularly external users, to have access to a command-line interface is a significant
security risk. To mitigate this risk, mailbox access protocols were devised. The two most widely
supported mailbox access protocols are Post Office Protocol (POP) and Internet Message Access Protocol
(IMAP). They are covered in Sections 2.4.1 and 2.4.2, respectively. As with message transfer protocols
for MTAs, other proprietary mailbox access protocols exist that are regularly used by commercial
software manufacturers; proprietary protocols are discussed in Section 2.4.3. It is important to understand
that POP, IMAP, and indeed most proprietary protocols in their default configuration use cleartext 
passwords for authentication, which can be intercepted by other hosts attached to the network. Section
2.4.4 briefly discusses the protocols used for Web-based mail access.
2.4.1 Post Office Protocol
POP was first developed in 1984. At its core, POP was nothing more than a way to copy messages from
the mail server mailbox to the mail client. It worked much like a traditional post office mailbox. The
mail client opens a connection to the mail server mailbox, downloads the email messages, and then closes
the connection. As described in RFC 918, only nine commands were originally available for POP (see
"Basic Commands" in Figure 2.5). 
Since 1984, POP has gone through several changes and is now in its third iteration as defined in RFC
1939. The basic command set is very similar to the command set of 1984; however, POP version 3 offers
a few new optional commands, listed in Figure 2.5. From a security standpoint, the addition of the APOP
was important, since it avoids transmitting a user's password in the clear. Instead, a challenge/response
mechanism is used, by which the client responds with a cryptographic hash of the combined challenge
sent from the server and the user's password, for verification by a POP mail server performing the same
operation for the user in question.
RFC 2449, POP3 Extension Mechanism, defines an extension to POP3 that allows clients to discover
additional information about POP3 servers, such as which extensions and optional commands they
support. Figure 2.5 shows the command added to POP3 by the extension.
The POP mailbox access standard has some significant limitations. Typically, when users retrieve their
email, copies of the messages that reside on the server are deleted. This means that the user has the sole
responsibility of maintaining message archives. Although this may be acceptable for personal accounts, it
is generally unacceptable for most commercial or governmental organizations that have to meet certain
legal requirements. In addition, if a user employs several workstations for retrieving email, the messages
are dispersed on multiple hosts. POP may be configured so that the original messages are not deleted
from the server. However, the user will either have to download all of the messages previously viewed as 
well as the new messages when accessing a mailbox from another host, or have to set up a retention
period after which messages are automatically deleted from the server.
2.4.2 Internet Message Access Protocol
To address the above-mentioned issues with POP, IMAP was developed in 1988. The IMAP protocol
was developed as a functional superset of the POP version 2 protocol. At the most basic level, IMAP was
designed so user mailboxes could be centrally located and accessed from multiple mail clients or MUAs.
Initially, IMAP offered very little functionality beyond that of POP, but since 1988, it has evolved into a
robust mailbox access protocol. The current edition of the IMAP standard is RFC 3501: Internet Message
Access Protocol – Version 4, Revision 1 (4rev1). Because IMAP 4rev1 supports many different features,
it has a much wider command set than that of POP. Figure 2.6 provides a list of IMAP 4rev1 commands.
Additionally, with the CAPABILITY command, the IMAP server can be queried to determine if other
IMAP extensions are supported. 
Table 2.2 lists the associated RFCs for the noted IMAP extensions. IMAP has been extended with a
challenge/response mechanism comparable to APOP, which is called the Challenge-Response
Authentication Mechanism (CRAM). CRAM requires the client to make note of the challenge data sent
by the server and respond with a string consisting of the user's name, a space, and a digest computed by
applying a keyed hash algorithm against the timestamp sent with the challenge, using a shared secret as
the key. 
2.4.3 Proprietary Mailbox Access Mechanisms
Proprietary mailbox access protocols are designed to work within closed messaging environments.
Microsoft Exchange and Lotus Notes are examples of messaging systems that use proprietary mailbox
access protocols. These proprietary protocols offer additional functionality when used with their
associated clients. Nearly all proprietary messaging systems support standard protocols, including SMTP,
POP, and IMAP, in order to interoperate with other types of MTAs and MUAs. Organizations must
decide for themselves whether it is appropriate to support proprietary protocols in their mail clients and
servers. As mentioned earlier, regardless of whether they are standard or proprietary, most access
protocols default to weak authentication mechanisms (unencrypted authentication information).
Therefore, organizations need to configure the access protocols to support stronger forms of
authentication.
2.4.4 Web-Based Mail Access
Web-based mail applications, also known as Webmail applications, are increasingly being used as a
means of email service delivery, because Web browsers that enable access to the client are available on
nearly every Internet-enabled device. A user simply runs a Web browser and connects to a Web site that
hosts the Web-based mail application. The connection is made using either Hypertext Transfer Protocol
(HTTP) or HTTP over Transport Layer Security (TLS), also known as HTTPS. HTTPS encrypts the
communications, which protects both authentication information and email message content. HTTP alone
does not offer any protection, so organizations should consider using HTTPS for Web-based mail
application communications.
Web-based mail applications incorporate much of the mail-handling functionality of traditional mail
clients and communicate with their associated mail servers using the same mailbox access protocols
described earlier—SMTP, POP, and IMAP, as well as proprietary protocols. The mailbox access
protocols are used between the Web servers and mail servers only; the protocols are not carried between
the Web servers and Web browsers. 
3. Signing and Encrypting Email Messages
Organizations often want to protect the confidentiality and integrity of some of their email messages, such
as preventing the exposure of personally identifiable information in an email attachment. Email messages
can be protected by using cryptography in various ways, such as the following:
• Sign an email message to ensure its integrity and confirm the identity of its sender.
• Encrypt the body of an email message to ensure its confidentiality.
• Encrypt the communications between mail servers to protect the confidentiality of both the message
body and message header.
The first two methods, message signing and message body encryption, are often used together. For
example, if a message needs to be encrypted to protect its confidentiality, it is usually digitally signed as
well, so that the recipient can ensure the integrity of the message and verify the identity of the signer.
Messages that are digitally signed are usually not encrypted if the confidentiality of the contents does not
need to be protected.
The third cryptography method listed above, encrypting the transmissions between mail servers, is
typically applicable only when two organizations want to protect emails regularly sent between them. For
example, the organizations could establish a virtual private network (VPN) to encrypt the
communications between their mail servers over the Internet. Unlike methods that can only encrypt a
message body, a VPN can encrypt entire messages, including email header information such as senders,
recipients, and subjects. In some cases, organizations may need to protect header information. However,
a VPN solution alone cannot provide a message signing mechanism, nor can it provide protection for
email messages along the entire route from sender to recipient.
Because most email messages are protected individually by digitally signing and optionally encrypting
them, this section focuses on the use of these methods. The most widely used standards for signing
messages and encrypting message bodies are Open Pretty Good Privacy (OpenPGP) and
Secure/Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions (S/MIME). Both are based in part on the concept of
public key cryptography, which involves a user having a pair of related keys: a public key that anyone can
hold, and a private key that is held exclusively by its owner. Because public key cryptography is so
computationally intense, it is used sparingly in email security; symmetric key cryptography, which is
much more efficient, is much more heavily used.
Symmetric key cryptography requires a single key to be shared between communicating parties, the
sender and recipient of an email message. The process involves the sender generating a random key and
encrypting the message with it using a symmetric key encryption algorithm. The sender then encrypts the
symmetric key with a corresponding public key encryption algorithm using the recipient's public key, and
sends both the encrypted message and encrypted symmetric key together to the recipient. This hybrid
process uses public key encryption only to encrypt the symmetric key. Because only the intended
message recipient holds the private key that is needed to recover the symmetric key, no other party can
decrypt the message and read it. Digital signature techniques rely on the creation of a digest or 
fingerprint of the information (i.e., the message being sent) using a cryptographic hash, which can be
signed more efficiently than the entire message.
Federal organizations are required to use cryptographic algorithms that have been approved by the
Federal government. Other organizations may wish to choose encryption schemes approved by the
Federal government because these are well-tested and secure. Table 3.1 presents general
recommendations for selecting cryptographic suites for protecting email messages. 
3.1 OpenPGP 
OpenPGP is a protocol for encrypting and signing messages and for creating certificates using public key
cryptography. It is based on an earlier protocol, PGP, which was created by Phil Zimmerman and
implemented as a product first released in June 1991. The initial PGP protocol was proprietary and used
some encryption algorithms with intellectual property restrictions. In 1996, version 5.x of PGP was
defined in IETF RFC 1991, PGP Message Exchange Formats. Subsequently, OpenPGP was developed
as a new standard protocol based on PGP version 5.x. OpenPGP is defined in RFC 2440, OpenPGP
Message Format, and RFC 3156, MIME Security with OpenPGP.
Many free and commercial products that use the OpenPGP standard are currently available. The software
can be downloaded or purchased from a variety of Web sites. Some OpenPGP-based products fully
support the cryptographic algorithms recommended to the Federal government by NIST in FIPS PUB
140-2 and other publications, including 3DES and AES for data encryption, Digital Signature Algorithm
(DSA) and RSA for digital signatures, and SHA for hashing. Some implementations of OpenPGP
support other encryption schemes not addressed here.
Although certain aspects of OpenPGP do use public key cryptography, such as digitally signed message
digests, the actual encryption of the message body is performed with a symmetric key algorithm, as
outlined earlier. The following is a brief description of signing and encrypting a message with OpenPGP
(some steps may occur in a different order):
• OpenPGP compresses the plaintext, which reduces transmission time and strengthens cryptographic
security by obfuscating plaintext patterns commonly searched for during cryptanalysis.
• OpenPGP creates a random session key (in some implementations of OpenPGP, users are required to
move their mouse at will within a window to generate random data).
• A digital signature is generated for the message using the sender's private key, and then added to the
message.
• The message and signature are encrypted using the session key and a symmetric algorithm (e.g.,
3DES, AES).
• The session key is encrypted using the recipient's public key and added to the beginning of the
encrypted message.
• The encrypted message is sent to the recipient.
The recipient reverses the steps to recover the session key, decrypt the message, and verify the signature.
Popular mail clients such as Mozilla Thunderbird, Apple Mail, Eudora, and Microsoft Outlook require the
installation of plug-ins to enable the user to send and receive OpenPGP-encrypted messages. The
OpenPGP distribution sites listed earlier in this section contain instructions on how to use OpenPGP with
various mail client applications.
There are also security gateway servers available that can use OpenPGP to encrypt, decrypt, sign, and
verify signatures on email messages on behalf of users. If two organizations exchanging emails both use
compatible security gateway servers, then the use of OpenPGP is essentially transparent to users. If only
one organization has such a gateway, it can still be used to protect messages, but it is not a transparent
process at all to users at other organizations. If a gateway user sends an email to a recipient at another
organization, that recipient will actually receive a notification email from the gateway that explains how
to retrieve the protected email, typically through an SSL-encrypted HTTP session. Some gateways can
also perform these functions for emails sent to lists of users. For example, a single user could send an
encrypted and signed email to a mailing list address. The gateway would decrypt the email and re-encrypt it for all the individual recipients of the mailing list. Each recipient can then decrypt the email
and verify the original signature.
3.2 S/MIME
S/MIME, which was originally proposed in 1995 by RSA Data Security, Inc., is based on their
proprietary (although widely supported) Public Key Cryptography Standard (PKCS) #7 for data format of
encrypted messages, and the X.509 version 3 standard for digital certificates. S/MIME version 2
achieved wide adoption throughout the Internet mail industry. Although it is not a recognized IETF
standard, it is specified by informational RFCs 2311, 2312, 2313, 2314, 2315, and 2268.
S/MIME version 3 was developed by the IETF S/MIME Working Group, which now coordinates all
development of the S/MIME standard, and adopted as an IETF standard in July 1999. S/MIME version
3 is specified by the following RFCs:
• Cryptographic Message Syntax (RFC 3852)
• S/MIME Version 3 Message Specification (RFC 3851)
• S/MIME Version 3 Certificate Handling (RFC 3850)
• Diffie-Hellman Key Agreement Method (RFC 2631)
• Enhanced Security Services for S/MIME (RFC 2634).
The most significant feature of S/MIME is its built-in and nearly "automatic" nature. Because of heavy
industry involvement from manufacturers, S/MIME functionality exists with default installations of
common mail clients such as Mozilla and Outlook Express.
The actual process by which S/MIME-enabled mail clients send messages is similar to that of
OpenPGP. S/MIME version 3.1 supports two symmetric key encryption algorithms recommended by
FIPS PUB 140-2: AES, which is recommended but optional for compliant implementations to support,
and 3DES, which is mandatory for implementations to support. Organizations using S/MIME to protect
emails should use AES or 3DES (preferably AES, which is considered a stronger algorithm than 3DES).
As with OpenPGP, there are security gateway servers available that can use S/MIME to encrypt, decrypt,
sign, and verify signatures on email messages on behalf of users. These gateways are very similar to
those described in Section 3.1, and many of the gateways actually support both OpenPGP and S/MIME.
3.3 Key Management
Both OpenPGP and S/MIME use digital certificates to manage keys. A digital certificate identifies the
entity (e.g., a user) that was issued the certificate, the public key of the entity's public key pair, and other
information, such as the date of expiration, signed by some trusted party. However, differences exist in
the key management models used by OpenPGP and S/MIME to establish trust using digital certificates. 
The default and traditional model that OpenPGP uses for key management is referred to as the "web of
trust," which has no central key issuing or approving authority. The web of trust relies on the personal
decisions of users for management and control. For example, if Alice trusts Bob and Carol trusts Alice,
then Carol should trust Bob's emails. While this is suitable for individual users and very small
organizations, the overhead of such a system is unworkable in most medium to large organizations. Some
organizations deploy keyservers that users can access to get others' keys and store their own keys.
Although this does promote scalability, the process is typically controlled mainly by individual users, and
organizations are often not comfortable trusting keyservers to provide sufficient assurance of user
identity.
Conversely, S/MIME works on a classical, more hierarchical arrangement of authorities that the
organization chooses to trust. Typically, there is a master registration and approving authority, referred to
as a root Certificate Authority (CA), that issues a public key certificate for itself and any subordinate CAs
it sanctions. Subordinate CAs normally issue certificates to users and also to any other subordinate CAs
that they in turn sanction, forming a hierarchy. Such a public key infrastructure can be used to establish a
chain of trust between any two users holding valid certificates issued under it. By default, S/MIME-enabled mail clients depend on the trust of their immediate master CA when processing S/MIME
transactions. This authority can be either a third-party CA or a CA that is controlled by the organization
issuing the certificates.
Having an organization exchange OpenPGP or S/MIME-protected emails with other organizations is
usually extremely complicated, especially when attempting to maintain transparency for the users. The
biggest challenges are key exchange and establishing trust relationships between the organizations.
Organizations can connect their PKIs or use a mutually trusted third-party PKI, but in either case there are
often technical and legal or regulatory challenges. Also, support for OpenPGP and S/MIME varies
considerably depending on the mail client in use.
Third-party services are available that allow organizations to exchange encrypted email without having to
establish trust relationships or worry about mail application compatibility. However, the use of such
services necessitates placing sensitive messages on third-party servers, which itself can be a security
concern. The use of mail encryption gateways between two organizations typically has lesser key
management concerns because the keys are maintained on the gateways and a trust relationship already
exists between the gateways.
Work is currently underway on a possible method of reducing key management concerns for email
signing and encryption. Identity-based encryption (IBE) is a form of public key encryption that allows
any string to be used as a public key. By using email addresses as public keys, IBE could simplify key
management, making it much easier for senders to protect the emails that they send. However, there are
serious barriers to adoption of IBE, including no open standards for IBE and no FIPS-approved IBE
products. Informational Internet-Drafts have been started that propose how IBE could be performed
using S/MIME.
3.4 Issues with Email Encryption
Although encrypting email provides additional security, it does come at a cost, so organizations should
carefully weigh the issues associated with encrypting email messages: 
• Scanning for viruses and other malware and filtering email content at the firewall and mail server is
made significantly more complicated by encryption. If the firewall or mail server does not have a
method for decrypting the email, it cannot read and act upon the contents. Some malware scanners
can decrypt emails if the scanner is a recipient of the emails or if the sender specifically encrypts the
emails for the scanner, but such solutions are technically complex and often hard to enforce. Also,
giving the malware scanner the ability to decrypt many or all emails could have serious consequences
if the malware scanner host is itself infected or otherwise compromised. If having the malware
scanner decrypt emails is not feasible, scanning might have to be performed on the hosts of the mail
clients that perform decryption.
• Encryption and decryption require processor time. Organizations might need to upgrade or replace
equipment that is not capable of supporting the load of encryption and decryption.
• Organization-wide use of encryption can require significant ongoing administrative overhead.
Examples of this include key distribution, key recovery, and revocation of encryption keys.
• Email encryption can complicate the review of email messages by law enforcement and other
investigative parties.
• Encrypted emails sent to or received from other organizations may be insufficiently protected if those
organizations do not support the use of strong encryption algorithms and key sizes. Organizations
should ensure that their users' mail applications notify them when they receive a weakly encrypted
message or when they are attempting to send an encrypted message to a recipient that only supports
weak encryption methods. Users can then contact the relevant party to notify them of the problem
and request that they either use a stronger encryption algorithm or transfer the information that needs
protected through a mechanism other than email. 
4. Planning and Managing Mail Servers
The most critical aspect of deploying a secure mail server is careful planning before installation,
configuration, and deployment. Careful planning will ensure that the mail server is as secure as possible
and in compliance with all relative organizational policies. Many mail server security and performance
problems can be traced back to a lack of planning or management controls. The importance of
management controls is difficult to overstate. In many organizations, the information technology support
structure is highly fragmented. This fragmentation leads to inconsistencies, and these inconsistencies can
lead to security vulnerabilities.
4.1 Installation and Deployment Planning
Security of the mail server should be considered from the initial planning stage at the beginning of the
systems development life cycle to maximize security and minimize costs. It is much more difficult and
expensive to address security once implementation and deployment have occurred. Organizations are
more likely to make decisions about configuring hosts appropriately and consistently when they begin by
developing and using a detailed, well-designed deployment plan. Developing such a plan enables
organizations to make informed tradeoff decisions between usability and performance, and risk. A
deployment plan allows organizations to maintain secure configurations and aids in identifying security
vulnerabilities, which often manifest themselves as deviations from the plan.
In the planning stages of a mail server, the following items should be considered [Alle00]:
• Identify the purpose(s) of the mail server.
– What information categories will be stored on, processed on, or transmitted through the mail
server?
– What are the security requirements for this information?
– What other service(s) will be provided by the mail server (in general, dedicating the host to being
only a mail server is the most secure option)?
– What are the security requirements for these additional services?
– What are the requirements for continuity of mail services, such as those specified in continuity of
operations plans and disaster recovery plans?
– Where on the network will the mail server be located (see Section 7.1)?
• Identify the network services that will be provided on the mail server (in addition to the
organization's standard services provided by every server for backup, remote administration, etc.),
such as those supplied through standard email protocols (e.g., SMTP, POP, IMAP) and proprietary
email protocols.
• Identify any network service software, both client and server, to be installed on the mail server and
any other support servers.
• Identify the users or categories of users of the mail server and any support hosts, including servers
providing Web-based mail access.
• Determine the privileges that each category of user will have on the mail server and support hosts. 
• Determine how the mail server will be managed (e.g., locally, remotely from the internal network,
remotely from external networks).
• Decide if and how users will be authenticated and how authentication data will be protected.
• Identify any security or privacy requirements for address-related information, such as username, user
identity, and organizational association.
• Determine how appropriate access to information resources will be enforced.
• Determine which mail server applications meet the organization's requirements. Consider servers
that may offer greater security, albeit with less functionality in some instances. Some issues to
consider include the following:
– Cost
– Compatibility with existing infrastructure
– Knowledge of existing employees
– Existing manufacturer relationship
– Past vulnerability history
– Functionality
• Work closely with manufacturer(s) in the planning stage.
The choice of mail server application may determine the choice of operating system. However, to the
degree possible, mail server administrators should choose an operating system that provides the following
[Alle00]:
• Minimal exposure to vulnerabilities (which can be identified on all operating systems)
• Ability to restrict administrative or root level activities to authorized users only
• Ability to deny access to information on the server other than that intended to be available
• Ability to disable unnecessary network services that may be built into the operating system or server
software
• Ability to log appropriate server activities to detect intrusions and attempted intrusions.
In addition, organizations should consider the availability of trained, experienced staff to administer the
server and server products. Many organizations have learned the difficult lesson that a capable and
experienced administrator for one type of operating environment is not automatically as effective for
another.
Given the sensitive nature of the mail server, it is critical that it is located in an area that provides a secure
physical environment. When planning the location of the mail server, the following items should be
considered:
• Does the proposed location offer the appropriate physical security protection mechanisms? Examples
include locks, card reader access, security guards, and physical intrusion detection systems (e.g.,
motion sensors, cameras). 
 Does the proposed location offer the appropriate environmental controls so that the necessary
humidity and temperature are maintained?
• Is there a backup power source?
• If the location is subject to known natural disasters, is it hardened against those disasters and/or is
there a contingency site outside the potential disaster area?
4.2 Security Management Staff
Because mail server security is tightly intertwined with the organization's general information system
security posture, a number of IT and system security staff may be interested in mail server planning,
implementation, and administration. This section provides a list of those roles and identifies their
responsibilities as related to mail server security. These roles may vary with the organization, however,
and not all organizations will have the identical roles described here.
4.2.1 Senior IT Management/Chief Information Officer (CIO)
The Senior IT Management/CIO ensures that the organization's security posture is adequate. The Senior
IT Management provides direction and advisory services for the protection of information systems for the
entire organization. The Senior IT Management/CIO is responsible for the following activities that are
associated with mail servers:
• Coordinating the development and maintenance of the organization's information security policies,
standards, and procedures
• Coordinating the development and maintenance of the organization's change control and management
procedures
• Ensuring the establishment of, and compliance with, consistent IT security policies for departments
throughout the organization
• Coordinating with upper management, public affairs, and other relevant personnel to produce a
formal policy and process for email usage guidelines (e.g., personal use, monitoring, encryption).
4.2.2 Information Systems Security Program Managers
The Information Systems Security Program Managers (ISSPM) oversee the implementation of and
compliance with the standards, rules, and regulations specified in the organization's security policy. The
ISSPMs are responsible for the following activities associated with mail servers:
• Ensuring that security procedures are developed and implemented
• Ensuring that security policies, standards, and requirements are followed
• Ensuring that all critical systems are identified and that contingency planning, disaster recovery plans,
and continuity of operations plans exist for these critical systems
• Ensuring that critical systems are identified and scheduled for periodic security testing according to
the security policy requirements of each respective system. 
4.2.3 Information Systems Security Officers
Information Systems Security Officers (ISSO) are responsible for overseeing all aspects of information
security within a specific organizational entity. They ensure that the organization's information security
practices comply with organizational and departmental policies, standards, and procedures. ISSOs are
responsible for the following activities associated with mail servers:
• Developing internal security standards and procedures for the mail server(s) and supporting network
infrastructure
• Cooperating in the development and implementation of security tools, mechanisms, and mitigation
techniques
• Maintaining standard configuration profiles of the mail servers and supporting network infrastructure
controlled by the organization, including but not limited to operating systems, firewalls, routers, and
mail server applications
• Maintaining operational integrity of systems by conducting security tests and ensuring that designated
IT professionals are conducting scheduled testing on critical systems.
4.2.4 Mail Server and Network Administrators
Mail server administrators are system architects responsible for the overall design, implementation, and
maintenance of a mail server. Network administrators are responsible for the overall design,
implementation, and maintenance of a network. On a daily basis, mail server and network administrators
contend with the security requirements of the specific system(s) for which they are responsible. Security
issues and solutions can originate from either outside (e.g., security patches and fixes from the
manufacturer or computer security incident response teams) or within the organization (e.g., the security
office). The administrators are responsible for the following activities associated with mail servers:
• Installing and configuring hosts in compliance with the organizational security policies and standard
system/network configurations
• Maintaining hosts in a secure manner, including frequent backups and timely application of patches
• Monitoring system integrity, protection levels, and security-related events
• Following up on detected security anomalies associated with their information system resources
• Conducting security tests as required.
4.3 Management Practices
Appropriate management practices are critical to operating and maintaining a secure mail server.
Security practices entail the identification of an organization's information system assets and the
development, documentation, and implementation of policies, standards, procedures, and guidelines that
ensure confidentiality, integrity, and availability of information system resources.
To ensure the security of a mail server and the supporting network infrastructure, organizations should
implement the following practices:
• Organizational Information System Security Policy—A security policy should specify the basic
information system security tenets and rules and their intended internal purpose. The policy should
also outline who in the organization is responsible for particular areas of information security (e.g., 
implementation, enforcement, audit, review). The policy must be enforced consistently throughout
the organization to be effective. Generally, the CIO and upper management are responsible for
drafting the organization's security policy.
• Configuration/Change Control and Management—The process of controlling modification to a
system's design, hardware, firmware, and software provides sufficient assurance that the system is
protected against the introduction of an improper modification before, during, and after system
implementation. Configuration control leads to consistency with the organization's information
system security policy. Configuration control is traditionally overseen by a configuration control
board that is the final authority on all proposed changes to an information system.
• Risk Assessment and Management—Risk assessment is the process of analyzing and interpreting
risk. It involves determining an assessment's scope and methodology, collecting and analyzing risk-related data, and interpreting the risk analysis results. Collecting and analyzing risk data requires
identifying assets, threats, vulnerabilities, safeguards, consequences, and the probability of a
successful attack. Risk management is the process of selecting and implementing controls to reduce
risk to a level acceptable to the organization.
• Standardized Configurations—Organizations should develop standardized secure configurations
for widely used operating systems and applications. This will provide guidance to mail server and
network administrators on how to configure their systems securely and ensure consistency and
compliance with the organizational security policy. Because it only takes one insecurely configured
host to compromise a network, organizations with a significant number of hosts are especially
encouraged to apply this recommendation. Section 5 contains additional information on standard
configurations.
• Security Awareness and Training—A security training program is critical to the overall security
posture of an organization. Making users and administrators aware of their security responsibilities
and teaching the correct practices helps them change their behavior to conform to security best
practices. Training also supports individual accountability, which is an important method for
improving information system security.
• Contingency, Continuity of Operations, and Disaster Recovery Planning—Contingency plans,
continuity of operations plans, and disaster recovery plans are established in advance to allow an
organization or facility to maintain operations in the event of a disruption.
• Certification and Accreditation—Certification in the context of information systems security means
that a system has been analyzed as to how well it meets all of the security requirements of the
organization. Accreditation occurs when the organization's management accepts that the system
meets the organization's security requirements.
4.4 System Security Plan
The objective of system security planning is to improve protection of information system resources.
Plans that adequately protect information assets require managers and information owners—directly
affected by and interested in the information and/or processing capabilities—to be convinced that their 
information assets are adequately protected from loss, misuse, unauthorized access or modification,
unavailability, and undetected activities.
The purpose of the system security plan is to provide an overview of the security and privacy
requirements of the system and describe the controls in place or planned for meeting those requirements.
The system security plan also delineates responsibilities and expected behavior of all individuals who
access the system. The system security plan should be viewed as documentation of the structured process
of planning adequate, cost-effective security protection for a system. It should reflect input from various
managers with responsibilities concerning the system, including information owners, the system owner,
and the senior agency information security officer (SAISO).
For Federal agencies, all information systems must be covered by a system security plan. Other
organizations should strongly consider the completion of a system security plan for each of their systems
as well. The information system owner is generally the party responsible for ensuring that the security
plan is developed and maintained and that the system is deployed and operated according to the agreed-upon security requirements.
In general, an effective system security plan should include the following:
• System Identification. The first sections of the system security plan provide basic identifying
information about the system. They contain general information such as the key points of contact for
the system, the purpose of the system, the sensitivity level of the system, and the environment in
which the system is deployed.
• Controls. This section of the plan describes the control measures (in place or planned) that are
intended to meet the protection requirements of the information system. Controls fall into three
general categories:
– Management controls, which focus on the management of the computer security system and the
management of risk for a system.
– Operational controls, which are primarily implemented and executed by people (as opposed to
systems). They often require technical or specialized expertise, and often rely upon management
activities as well as technical controls.
– Technical controls, which are security mechanisms that the computer system employs. The
controls can provide automated protection from unauthorized access or misuse, facilitate
detection of security violations, and support security requirements for applications and data. The
implementation of technical controls, however, always requires significant operational
considerations and should be consistent with the management of security within the organization.
[Swan06] 
4.5 Human Resources Requirements
The greatest challenge and expense in developing and securely maintaining a mail server is providing the
necessary human resources to adequately perform the required functions. Many organizations fail to fully
realize the amount of expense and skills required to field a secure mail server. This failure often results in
overworked employees and insecure systems. From the initial planning stages, organizations need to
determine the necessary human resource requirements. Appropriate and sufficient human resources are
the single most important aspect of mail server security. Organizations should also consider the fact that,
in general, technical solutions are not a substitute for skilled and experienced personnel.
When considering the human resource implications of developing and deploying a mail server,
organizations should address the following in the deployment plan:
• Required Personnel – What types of personnel are going to be required? This would include such
positions as system and mail server administrators, network administrators, and ISSOs.
• Required Skills – What are the required skills to adequately plan, develop, and maintain the mail
server in a secure manner? Examples include operating system administration, network
administration, active content expertise, and programming.
• Available Personnel – What are the available human resources within the organization? In addition,
what are their current skill sets and are they sufficient for supporting the mail server? Often an
organization discovers that its existing human resources are not sufficient and needs to consider the
following options:
– Train Current Staff – If there are personnel available but they do not have the requisite skills, the
organization may choose to train the existing staff in the skills required. While this is an
excellent option, the organization should ensure that employees meet all prerequisites for training.
– Hire Additional Staff – If there is not enough staff available or they do not have the requisite
skills, it may be necessary to hire additional personnel.
Once the organization has staffed the project and the mail server is active, it will be necessary to ensure
the number and skills of the personnel are still adequate. The threat and vulnerability levels of hosts
including mail servers are constantly changing, as is the technology. This means that what is adequate
today may not be tomorrow.
4.6 General Information System Security Principles
When addressing mail server security issues, it is an excellent idea to keep some general information
security principles in mind [Curt01 and Salt75]:
• Simplicity—Security mechanisms (and the information systems in general) should be as simple as
possible. Complexity is at the root of many security issues.
• Fail-Safe—If a failure occurs, the system should fail in a secure manner by which security controls
and settings remain in effect and are enforced. It is usually better to lose functionality rather than
security.
• Complete Mediation—Rather than providing direct access to information, mediators that enforce
access policy should be employed. Common examples include file system permissions, proxies,
firewalls, and mail gateways. 
• Open Design—System security should not depend on the secrecy of the implementation or its
components. "Security through obscurity" is not reliable.
• Separation of Privilege—Functions, to the degree possible, should be separate and provide as much
granularity as possible. The concept can apply to both systems and operators/users. In the case of
systems, such functions such as read, edit, write, and execute should be separate. In the case of
system operators and users, roles should be as separate as possible. For example, if resources allow,
the role of system administrator should be separate from that of the security administrator.
• Least Privilege—This principle dictates that each task, process, or user is granted the minimum
rights required to perform its job. By applying this principle consistently, should a task, process, or
user be compromised, the scope of damage is constrained to the limited resources available to the
compromised entity.
• Psychological Acceptability—Users should understand the necessity of security. This can be
provided through training and education. In addition, the security mechanisms in place should
present users with sensible options that give them the usability they require on a daily basis. If users
find the security mechanisms too cumbersome, they may devise ways to work around or compromise
them. The objective is not to weaken security so it is understandable and acceptable, but to train,
educate, and design security mechanisms and policies that are usable and effective.
• Least Common Mechanism—When providing a feature to the system, it is best to have a process or
service gain some function without granting the same function to other parts of the system. The
ability for the mail server process to access a backend database, for instance, should not also enable
other applications on the system to access the backend database.
• Defense in Depth—Organizations should understand that a single security mechanism would
generally prove insufficient. Security mechanisms (defenses) need to be layered so that compromise
of a single security mechanism is insufficient to compromise a host or network. There is no "silver
bullet" for information system security.
• Work Factor—Organizations should understand what it would take to break the system or network's
security features. The amount of work necessary for an attacker to break the system or network
should exceed the value that the attacker would gain from a successful compromise.
• Compromise Recording—Records and logs should be maintained so that if a compromise does
occur, evidence of the attack is available to the organization. This information can assist in securing
the network and host after the compromise and assist in identifying the methods and exploits used by
the attacker. This information can be used to better secure the host or network in the future. In
addition, this can assist organizations in identifying and prosecuting attackers. 
4.7 Checklist for Planning and Managing Mail Servers 
5. Securing the Mail Server Operating System
Protecting a mail server from compromise involves hardening the underlying operating system, the mail
server application, and the network to prevent malicious entities from directly attacking the mail server.
The first step in securing a mail server, hardening the underlying operating system, is discussed at length
in this section. (Securing the mail server application and the network are addressed in Sections 6 and 7,
respectively).
All commonly available mail servers operate on a general-purpose operating system. Many security
issues can be avoided if the operating systems underlying the mail servers are configured appropriately.
Default hardware and software configurations are typically set by manufacturers to emphasize features,
functions, and ease of use at the expense of security. Because manufacturers are unaware of each
organization's security needs, each mail server administrator must configure new servers to reflect their
organization's security requirements and reconfigure them as those requirements change. The practices
recommended here are designed to help mail server administrators configure and deploy mail servers that
satisfy their organization's security requirements. Mail server administrators managing existing mail
servers should confirm that their systems address the issues discussed.
The techniques for hardening different operating systems vary greatly; therefore, this section includes the
generic procedures common in securing most operating systems. Security configuration guides and
checklists for many operating systems are publicly available; these documents typically contain
recommendations for settings that improve the default level of security, and they may also contain step-by-step instructions for securing systems. In addition, many organizations maintain their own
guidelines specific to their requirements. Some automated tools also exist for hardening operating
systems and their use is strongly recommended.
Five basic steps are necessary to maintain basic operating system security:
1. Planning the installation and deployment of the host operating system and other components for the
mail server
2. Patching and updating the host operating system as required
3. Hardening and configuring the host operating system to address security adequately
4. Installing and configuring additional security controls, if needed
5. Testing the host operating system to ensure that the previous four steps adequately address all security
issues.
The first step is discussed in Section 4.1. The other steps are covered in Sections 5.1 and 5.2. 
5.1 Updating and Configuring the Operating System
This section provides an overview of the second, third, and fourth steps in the list above. The combined
result of these steps should be to have reasonable protection for the mail server's operating system.
5.1.1 Patch and Upgrade Operating System
Once an operating system is installed, applying needed patches or upgrades to correct for known
vulnerabilities is essential. Any operating system has known vulnerabilities that should be corrected
before using it to host a mail server. To adequately detect and correct these vulnerabilities, mail server
administrators should do the following:
• Create and implement a patching process
• Identify vulnerabilities and applicable patches
• Mitigate vulnerabilities temporarily if needed and if feasible (until patches are available, tested, and
installed)
• Install permanent fixes (often called patches, hotfixes, service packs, or updates).
Administrators should ensure that mail servers, particularly new ones, are adequately protected during the
patching process. For example, a mail server that is not fully patched or not configured securely could be
compromised by threats if it is publicly accessible while it is being patched. When preparing new mail
servers for deployment, administrators should do either of the following:
• Keep the servers disconnected from networks or connect them only to an isolated "build" network
until all patches have been transferred to the servers through out-of-band means (e.g., CDs) and
installed, and the other configuration steps listed in Section 5.1 have been performed.
• Place the servers on a virtual local area network (VLAN) or other network segment that severely
restricts what actions the hosts on it can perform and what communications can reach the hosts—only
allowing those events that are necessary for patching and configuring the hosts. Do not transfer the
hosts to regular network segments until all the configuration steps listed in Section 5.1 have been
performed.
Administrators should generally not apply patches to mail servers without first testing them on another
identically configured server, because patches can inadvertently cause operational problems. Although
administrators can configure mail servers to download patches automatically, the servers should not be
configured to install them automatically so that they can first be tested.
5.1.2 Remove or Disable Unnecessary Services and Applications
Ideally, a mail server should be on a dedicated, single-purpose host. When configuring the operating
system, disable everything except that which is expressly permitted – that is, disable all services and
applications, enable only those required by the mail server, and then remove the unneeded services and
applications. If possible, install the minimal operating system configuration that is required for the mail 
server application. Choose the "minimal installation" option, if available, to minimize the effort required
in removing unnecessary services. In addition, many uninstall scripts or programs are far from perfect in
completely removing all components of a service; therefore, it is always better not to install unnecessary
services. Some common types of services and applications that should usually be disabled if not required
include the following:
• File and printer sharing services (e.g., Windows Network Basic Input/Output System [NetBIOS] file
and printer sharing, Network File System [NFS], File Transfer Protocol [FTP])
• Default Web servers
• Wireless networking services
• Remote control and remote access programs, particularly those that do not strongly encrypt their
communications (e.g., Telnet)
• Directory services (e.g., Lightweight Directory Access Protocol [LDAP], Kerberos, Network
Information System [NIS])
• Language compilers and libraries
• System development tools
• System and network management tools and utilities, including Simple Network Management Protocol
(SNMP).
Removing unnecessary services and applications is preferable to simply disabling them through
configuration settings, because attacks that attempt to alter settings and activate a disabled service cannot
succeed when the functional components are completely removed. Disabled services could also be
enabled inadvertently through human error.
Eliminating or disabling unnecessary services enhances the security of a mail server in several ways
[Alle00]:
• Other services cannot be compromised and used to attack the host or impair the services of the mail
server. Each service added to a host increases the risk of compromise for that host because each
service is another possible avenue of access for an attacker. Less is more secure in this case.
• Other services might have flaws or might be incompatible with the mail server itself. Disabling or
removing them prevents them from affecting the mail server, including its availability.
• The host can be configured to better suit the requirements of the particular service. Different services
might require different hardware and software configurations, which could lead to unnecessary
vulnerabilities or negatively affect performance.
• By reducing services, the number of logs and log entries is reduced; therefore, detecting unexpected
behavior becomes easier (see Section 9).
Organizations should determine the services to be enabled on a mail server. Services in addition to the
mail server service that might be installed include directory protocols to access the organization's user
directory and remote administration services. These services may be required in certain instances, but 
they may increase the risks to the server. Whether the risks outweigh the benefits is a decision for each
organization to make.
If Web-based mail access is to be provided, the Web server running the mail application should be on a
separate host from the mail server. Having the Web and mail servers on separate hosts limits the impact
if one of them is compromised when compared with having both servers on the same host. The benefits
of the latter arrangement are efficient and protected communications, because the Web and mail servers
communicate directly within a host instead of over a network.
5.1.3 Configure Operating System User Authentication
For mail servers, the authorized users who can configure the operating system are limited to a small
number of designated mail server administrators. The users who can access the mail server, however,
may range from unrestricted to restricted subsets of the organization's employees. To enforce policy
restrictions, if required, the mail server administrator must configure the operating system to authenticate
a prospective user by requiring proof that the user is authorized for such access.
Enabling authentication by the host computer involves configuring parts of the operating system,
firmware, and applications, such as the software that implements a network service. In special cases, for
high-value/high-risk sites, organizations may also use authentication hardware, such as tokens or one-time
password devices. Use of authentication mechanisms where authentication information is reusable (e.g.,
passwords) and transmitted in the clear over a network is strongly discouraged, because the information
can be intercepted and used by an attacker to masquerade as an authorized user.
To ensure the appropriate user authentication is in place, take the following steps [Alle00]:
• Remove or disable unneeded default accounts and groups. The default configuration of the
operating system often includes guest accounts (with and without passwords), administrator or root
level accounts, and accounts associated with local and network services. The names and passwords
for those accounts are well known. Remove or disable unnecessary accounts to eliminate their use by
attackers, including guest accounts on computers containing sensitive information. If there is a
requirement to retain a guest account or group, severely restrict its access and change the default
password in accordance with the organizational password policy. For default accounts that need to be
retained, change the names (where possible and particularly for administrator or root level accounts)
and passwords to be consistent with the organizational password policy. Default account names and
passwords are commonly known in the attacker community.
• Disable non-interactive accounts. Disable accounts (and the associated passwords) that need to
exist but do not require an interactive login. For Unix systems, disable the login shell or provide a
login shell with NULL functionality (e.g., /bin/false).
• Create the user groups. Assign users to the appropriate groups. Then assign rights to the groups, as
documented in the deployment plan. This approach is preferable to assigning rights to individual
users because the latter becomes unwieldy with large numbers of users.
• Create the user accounts. The deployment plan identifies who will be authorized to use each
computer and its services. Create only the necessary accounts. Permit the use of shared accounts
only when no viable alternatives exist.
• Check the organization's password policy. Set account passwords appropriately. This policy
should address the following areas: 
– Length – a minimum length for passwords. Specify a minimum length of at least eight
characters.
– Complexity – the mix of characters required. Require passwords to contain both uppercase and
lowercase letters and at least one non-alphanumeric character, and to not be a "dictionary"
word.
– Aging – how long a password may remain unchanged. Require users to change their passwords
periodically. Administrator or root level passwords should be changed every 30 to 120 days.
User level passwords should also be changed periodically, with the period determined by the
enforced length and complexity of the password combined with the sensitivity of the information
protected. When considering the appropriate aging duration, the exposure level of user
passwords should also be taken into account.
– Reuse – whether a password may be reused. Some users try to defeat a password aging
requirement by changing the password to one they have used previously. If possible, ensure that
users cannot change their password by merely appending characters to the beginning or end of
their original password (e.g., original password was "mysecret" and is changed to "1mysecret" or
"mysecret1").
– Authority – who is allowed to change or reset passwords and what sort of proof is required
before initiating any changes.
– Password Security – how passwords should be secured, such as not storing passwords
unencrypted on the mail server, and requiring administrators to use different passwords for their
mail administration accounts than their other administration accounts.
• Configure computers to prevent password guessing. It is relatively easy for an unauthorized user
to try to gain access to a computer by using automated software tools that attempt all passwords. If
the operating system provides the capability, configure it to increase the period between login
attempts with each unsuccessful attempt. If that is not possible, the second alternative is to deny login
after a limited number of failed attempts (e.g., three). Typically, the account is "locked out" for a
period of time (such as 30 minutes) or until a user with appropriate authority reactivates it.
The choice to deny login is another situation that requires the mail server administrator to make a
decision that balances security and convenience. Implementing this recommendation can help
prevent some kinds of attacks, but it can also allow an attacker to make failed login attempts to
prevent user access, a denial of service (DoS) condition.
Failed network login attempts should not prevent an authorized user or administrator from logging in
at the console. Note that all failed login attempts whether via the network or console should be
logged. If remote administration is not to be implemented (see Section 9.5), disable the ability for the
administrator or root level accounts to log in from the network.
• Install and configure other security mechanisms to strengthen authentication. If the information
on the mail server requires it, consider using other authentication mechanisms such as biometrics,
smart cards, client/server certificates, or one-time password systems. They can be more expensive
and difficult to implement, but they may be justified in some circumstances. When such 
authentication mechanisms and devices are used, the organization's policy should be changed
accordingly.
As mentioned earlier, attackers using network sniffers can easily capture passwords passed across a
network in clear text. However, passwords are economical and appropriate if properly protected while in
transit. Implement authentication and encryption technologies, such as Secure Sockets Layer
(SSL)/Transport Layer Security (TLS), Secure Shell (SSH), or Virtual Private Networks (VPNs) (for
remote users), to protect passwords during transmission. Requiring server side authentication to be used
with encryption technologies reduces the likelihood of successful man-in-the-middle attacks.
5.1.4 Configure Resource Controls Appropriately
All commonly used modern server operating systems provide the capability to specify access privileges
individually for files, directories, devices, and other computational resources. By carefully setting access
controls and denying personnel unauthorized access, the mail server administrator can reduce security
breaches. For example, denying read access to files and directories helps to protect confidentiality of
information, and denying unnecessary write (modify) access can help maintain the integrity of
information. Limiting the execution privilege of most system-related tools to authorized system
administrators can prevent users from making configuration changes that could reduce security. It also
can restrict the attacker's ability to use those tools to attack the system or other systems on the network.
5.1.5 Install and Configure Additional Security Controls
Operating systems often do not include all of the security controls necessary to secure the operating
system, services, and applications adequately. In such cases, administrators need to select, install, and
configure additional software to provide the missing controls. Commonly needed controls include the
following:
• Anti-malware software, such as anti-virus software, anti-spyware software, and rootkit detectors, to
protect the local operating system from malware and to detect and eradicate any infections that
occur. Examples of when anti-malware software would be helpful include a mail administrator
bringing infected media to the mail server and a network service worm contacting the server and
infecting it. This software is independent of the anti-malware software used to scan the email passing
through the server. For many mail systems, anti-virus software is the only form of anti-malware
software needed to protect the OS.
• Host-based intrusion detection and prevention software, to detect attacks performed against the mail
servers. Section 7.2.2 contains additional information on host-based intrusion detection and
prevention software.
• Host-based firewalls, to protect the server from unauthorized access.
• Patch management software, to ensure that vulnerabilities are addressed promptly. Patch
management software can be used just to apply patches, or also to identify new vulnerabilities in the
mail server's operating systems, services, and applications. 
Some mail server administrators also install one or more forms of host-based intrusion detection software
on their servers. For example, file integrity checking software can identify changes to critical system
files.
When planning security controls, mail server administrators should consider the resources that the
security controls will consume. A server's performance could degrade if it does not have enough memory
and processing capacity for the controls.
5.2 Security Testing the Operating System
Periodic security testing of the operating system is a vital way to identify vulnerabilities and to ensure that
the existing security precautions are effective. Methods for testing operating systems include
vulnerability scanning and penetration testing. Vulnerability scanning usually entails using an automated
vulnerability scanner to scan a host or groups of hosts on a network for application, network, and
operating system vulnerabilities. Penetration testing is a testing process designed to compromise a
network using the tools and methodologies of an attacker. It involves iteratively identifying and
exploiting the weakest areas of the network to gain access to the remainder of the network, eventually
compromising the overall security of the network. Vulnerability scanning should be conducted
periodically, such as weekly or monthly, and penetration testing should be conducted at least annually.
Because both of these testing techniques also are applicable to testing the mail server application, they are
discussed in detail in Section 9.4.
5.3 Checklist for Securing the Mail Server Operating System 
6. Securing Mail Servers and Content
Hardening mail server applications is an important step in protecting mail servers from compromise. This
section provides recommendations for securely installing mail servers and configuring operating system
and mail server access controls. Another important part of mail security is protecting the email content
that traverses the server, which includes content filtering, malware scanning, and spam prevention.
Securing access to mailboxes by encrypting communications, including Web-based mail access, is also
addressed in this section. Email content security can also involve email encryption to preserve
confidentiality and digital signatures to support integrity and non-repudiation; these are discussed in
Section 3.
6.1 Hardening the Mail Server Application
After ensuring that the mail server's operating system is secured properly, the next step is to install the
mail server application and secure it from likely threats. The subsections that follow provide an overview
of these two actions.
6.1.1 Securely Installing the Mail Server
In many respects, the secure installation and configuration of the mail server application mirrors the
operating system process discussed in Section 5. The overarching principle, as before, is to install only
the services required for the mail server and to eliminate any known vulnerabilities through patches or
upgrades. Any unnecessary applications, services, or scripts that are installed should be removed
immediately once the installation process is complete. During the installation of the mail server, the
following steps should be performed:
• Install the mail server software on a dedicated host
• Apply any patches or upgrades to correct for known vulnerabilities
• Create a dedicated physical disk or logical partition (separate from operating system and mail server
application) for mailboxes, or host the mailboxes on a separate server
• Remove or disable all services installed by the mail server application but not required (e.g., Web-based mail, FTP, remote administration)
• Remove or disable all unneeded default login accounts created by the mail server installation
• Remove all manufacturer documentation from the server
• Remove any example or test files from the server
• Apply appropriate security template or hardening script to the server
• Reconfigure SMTP, POP, and IMAP service banners (and others as required) NOT to report mail
server and operating system type and version (this may not be possible with all mail servers)
• Disable dangerous or unnecessary mail commands (e.g., VRFY and EXPN).
6.1.2 Configuring Operating System and Mail Server Access Controls
Most mail server host operating systems provide the capability to specify access privileges individually
for files, devices, and other computational resources on that host. Any information that the mail server
can access using these controls can potentially be distributed to all users accessing the mail server. The 
mail server software is likely to include mechanisms to provide additional file, device, and resource
access controls specific to its operation. It is important to set identical permissions for both the operating
system and mail server application; otherwise, too much or too little access may be granted to users. Mail
server administrators should consider how best to configure access controls to protect information stored
on their public mail server from two perspectives:
• Limit the access of the mail server application to a subset of computational resources
• Limit the access of users through additional access controls enforced by the mail server, where more
detailed levels of access control are required.
The proper setting of access controls can help prevent the disclosure of sensitive or restricted information
that is not intended for public dissemination. In addition, access controls can be used to limit resource use
in the event of a DoS attack against the mail server.
Typical files to which access should be controlled are as follows:
• Application software and configuration files
• Files directly related to security mechanisms:
– Password hash files and other files used in authentication
– Files containing authorization information used in controlling access
– Cryptographic key material used in confidentiality, integrity, and non-repudiation services
• Server log and system audit files
• System software and configuration files.
Ensure that the mail server application executes only under a unique individual user and group identity
with very restrictive access controls. Thus, new user and group identities to be used exclusively by the
mail server software need to be established. The new user and new group should be independent and
unique from all other users and groups. This is a prerequisite for implementing the access controls
described in the following steps. Although the server may initially have to run with root (Unix) or
administrator/system (Windows) privileges to bind to the necessary TCP ports, do not allow the server to
continue to run at this level of access.
In addition, use the mail server operating system to limit files accessed by the mail service processes.
These processes should have read-only access to those files necessary to perform the service and should
have no access to other files, such as server log files. Use mail server host operating system access
controls to enforce the following:
• Temporary files created by the mail server application are restricted to a specified and appropriately
protected subdirectory (if possible).
• Access to any temporary files created by the mail server application is limited to the mail server
processes that created these files (if possible).
It is also necessary to ensure that the mail server cannot save files outside the specified file structure
dedicated to the mail server. This may be a configuration choice in the server software, or it may be a
choice in how the server process is controlled by the operating system. Ensure that such directories and 
files (outside the specified directory tree) cannot be accessed, even if users know the locations of those
files.
On Linux and Unix hosts, consider using a "chroot jail" for the mail server application. Using chroot
changes the mail server's "view" of the host file system such that the apparent root directory is not the
real file system root directory but rather one of its subparts. Thus, if the mail server is successfully
compromised, the attacker only gains access to the limited subpart of the file system accessible via chroot.
This is a very powerful security measure.
To mitigate the effects of certain types of DoS attacks, configure the mail server to limit the amount of
operating system resources it can consume. Some examples include:
• Installing users' mailboxes on a different server (preferred), hard drive, or logical partition than the
operating system and mail server application
• Configuring the mail server application so that it cannot consume all available space on its hard
drives or partitions
• Limiting the size of attachments that are allowed
• Ensuring log files are stored in a location that is sized appropriately.
To some degree, these actions protect against attacks that attempt to fill the file system on the mail server
host operating system with extraneous and incorrect information that may cause the system to crash. This
also protects against attacks that attempt to fill primary random access memory with unnecessary
processes to slow down or crash the system, thus limiting mail server availability. Logging information
generated by the mail server host operating system may help in recognizing such attacks. As discussed in
Section 9.1, administrators should store mail server logs on centralized logging servers whenever
possible, and also store logs locally if feasible. If an attack causes the mail server to be compromised, the
attacker could modify or erase locally stored logs to conceal information on the attack. Having a copy of
the logs on a centralized logging server gives administrators more information to use when investigating
such a compromise.
6.2 Protecting Email from Malware
Email has increasingly been used as a means for sending binary files in the form of attachments. Initially,
this did not pose much of a security risk because attachments were mostly small word processing
documents or photos. As more organizations began using email for day-to-day collaboration, the size and
types of email attachments increased. Today, many email messages are sent with attachments such as
program executables, pictures, music, and sounds. Many forms of malware, including viruses, worms,
Trojan horses, and spyware—malware intended to violate a user's privacy—are often transmitted in
attachments. Increasingly, attackers are using email to deliver zero-day attacks at targeted organizations
before these vulnerabilities are known publicly. These attacks are often targeted at office productivity
software and give the attacker control over users' workstations. This control can be exploited to escalate
privileges, gain access to sensitive information, monitor users' actions (e.g., keystrokes), and perform
other malicious actions.
Determining whether to allow certain types of attachments can be a difficult decision for an organization.
Not allowing any attachments would simplify a system and make it more secure; however, it would
dramatically reduce its usefulness, and users might employ encoding tricks to work around the restriction
to "get the job done". Ultimately, organizations choose to allow at least some email attachments. 
Organizations should determine which types of attachments to allow. The simplest approach is to allow
all types of attachments. If this is the case, then some sort of malware scanner (e.g., anti-virus software,
anti-spyware software) should be installed in the mail transit path to filter out known malware, and
perhaps even some behavior blocking utility installed at the client to prevent any unwanted operations by
executable attachments from occurring. A better approach is to filter potentially dangerous attachment
types (e.g., .vbs, .ws, .wsc file extensions) at the mail server or mail gateway, while conducting malware
scans on allowed file types. Although filtering on such extensions is a good first step, its effectiveness is
limited because attackers can alter the extensions. Instead of simply checking the extension, filtering
should check the file header, footer, or other identifying aspects of the file if possible to identify the
attachment. Organizations might also wish to consider setting different rules for internally originated
versus externally originated email or trusted versus untrusted organizations (e.g., trust .gov/.mil domains),
although this latter option is subject to email address spoofing.
Attachment filtering is not completely effective unless all attachments are blocked, and that is not
feasible. Some of the most useful attachment types, such as those from office productivity suites, are also
some of the riskiest. Also, sophisticated attackers can obfuscate the true nature of their malicious
attachments in various ways. For example, attackers sometimes send emails that have hyperlinks to a
malicious file on a remote Web site; if a user clicks on the hyperlink and it uses HTTPS instead of HTTP,
the malicious file will be downloaded while protected by HTTPS, concealing it from detection by
network-based security controls. Organizations could filter active hyperlinks in email messages to
prevent this, but this would reduce the usability of email messages for users. Also, an organization might
find it desirable for users to place hyperlinks to files in their email messages instead of attaching the files
to their messages, since this reduces the load on the mail servers.
Organizations should also consider restricting the maximum acceptable size for email attachments. This
benefits mail servers in several ways, including decreasing mail queue latency, storage requirements, and
server processor requirements. The combination of these benefits decreases the likelihood of a successful
denial of service attack caused by a deluge of oversized messages. [Mell05] However, setting a low
maximum size for attachments could inadvertently cause legitimate content to be blocked, reducing the
usability and value of the mail system.
Email encryption tends to make filtering more complicated or ineffective. Once a message is encrypted,
filtering on the mail server and/or perimeter devices is ineffective unless they can decrypt the message,
scan it, and re-encrypt it. This is problematic because of the huge performance requirement. Privacy and
other concerns with this sort of solution also exist. Generally speaking, if encryption is used extensively,
then filtering has to occur at the end point (mail client user workstation), which is susceptible to being
bypassed.
Another vector for email-borne malware that is often overlooked is personal mail accounts accessed via
Web browsers. Organizations need to determine if having access to personal mail accounts from
organizational computers is appropriate, and if so, take measures to ensure users do not put organization
assets at risk when accessing their personal accounts.
In addition to email attachments, malware can be transmitted via email by other means. For example,
many mail clients support HTML-based messages. These messages often contain active content in the
form of a client-side scripting language or control objects that can affect the client. The most popular
types of active content are ActiveX, Java, JavaScript, and Visual Basic Script (VBScript). Organizations
should determine whether or not to allow or block active content or forms of active content within email 
messages. HTML-based messages also frequently contain other undesirable content, such as spam
messages and phishing attempts. Phishing refers to use of deceptive computer-based means to trick
individuals into disclosing sensitive personal information. For example, an attacker could send victims an
email message that looks as if it were sent from a well-known organization, such as an online business,
credit card company, or financial institution. The email is intended to deceive users into responding to
the email and disclosing personal data.
If a mail server does not have malware scanning software installed (e.g., anti-virus software, anti-spyware
software), or the software is ineffective, the potential security threat posed by malware increases for end
users. Some popular mail clients have default configurations that are used by malware to infect client
hosts and transmit malware to other users. Section 8 contains additional information on configuring mail
clients to improve their security. In addition to mail client configuration, it is important that the mail
client hosts use anti-virus software and possibly other security technologies as well to protect them from
email-borne threats.
Section 6.2.1 discusses the need for malware scanning for both individual mail clients and the mail
infrastructure. Sections 6.2.2 discusses content filtering technologies that can also be helpful at stopping
email-borne threats. In addition to deploying and configuring technologies, an organization should also
conduct training and awareness activities for users, particularly telecommuters using computers outside
the organization's control, so that users can better recognize malicious email messages and attachments
and handle them appropriately. This is discussed in Section 6.2.3.
6.2.1 Malware Scanning
To protect against viruses, worms, and other forms of malware, it is necessary to implement scanning at
one or more points within the email delivery process. Malware scanning can be implemented on the
firewall, mail relay, or mail gateway appliance as the email data enters the organization's network, on the
mail server itself, and/or on the end users' hosts. Each option has its own strengths and weaknesses,
which are discussed below. Generally, organizations should implement at least two levels of malware
scanning—one at the end users' host level and one at the mail server or the firewall/mail relay/mail
gateway level—and should consider implementing malware scanning at all three levels.
When providing multiple layers of malware protection, organizations should consider choosing products
from different manufacturers. Diversity increases the chances of blocking the latest threats, because the
response time of individual manufacturers to new threats varies. This means that when the newest threats
appear, one product can often detect them earlier than another over some period of time (typically hours,
perhaps a few days). Since each manufacturer uses different detection methods, some products are also
better able to detect certain types of new threats than other products.
6.2.1.1 Scanning at the Firewall, Mail Relay, or Mail Gateway Appliance
The first option is scanning for malware at the firewall (application proxy), mail relay (see Figure 6.1), or
mail gateway appliance, which can intercept messages before they reach the organization's mail server.
The device listens on TCP port 25 for SMTP connections, scans each message, then forwards the
messages not containing malware to the mail server, which is configured to listen on an unprivileged,
unused port, rather than the usual port 25. A disadvantage to this approach is that constant scanning of
the SMTP stream can reduce firewall/ mail relay/mail gateway performance. Whether this performance
hit is significant depends on mail load, including both the typical number of emails per day and the peak
rates of emails, and quality of service requirements. One remedy to improve performance is to offload
malware scanning to a dedicated server. 
The benefits of scanning email at the firewall, mail relay, or mail gateway appliance are as follows:
• Can scan email in both directions (inbound and outbound from the organization's network)
• Can stop the majority of messages containing malware at the perimeter before they enter the network
and are passed to the mail server
• Can implement scanning for inbound email with minor changes to the existing mail server
configuration
• Can reduce the amount of email reaching the mail servers, allowing them to operate more efficiently
with lower operational costs
• Can reduce the amount of scanning to be performed by the mail servers, thus reducing their load
• Can centrally manage scanning to ensure compliance with the organization's security policy and
regular application of updated malicious code signatures
• For some mail firewall appliances, can provide secure authenticated access to Web-based mail
applications.
Scanning for malware at the firewall, mail relay, or mail gateway appliance has a number of weaknesses:
• Can require significant modification of the existing mail server configuration when scanning mail in
the outbound direction
• Cannot scan encrypted emails 
• Offers no protection to internal users once malware is on the organization's internal network, unless
the network is configured so that SMTP traffic gets routed through a dedicated scanner before
reaching the mail server
• May require powerful (expensive) servers or appliances to handle the load of a large organization.
6.2.1.2 Scanning on the Mail Server Itself
The second option for placement of a mail malware scanner is on the mail server itself (see Figure 6.2).
Many third-party applications are available to scan the contents of the message stores for most popular
mail servers. These applications inspect the email sent between internal users, which normally do not
pass through the organization's firewall/mail relay/mail gateway. Performing scanning on the mail server
also provides an additional layer of protection against malware, and also helps to stop internal malware
outbreaks. Some mail servers offer application programming interfaces (API) that support the integration
of malware scanning, content filtering, attachment blocking, and other security services within the MTA. 
The major disadvantage of implementing malware scanning on the mail server is the negative effect on
the performance of the mail server caused by the requirement to scan all messages. Also disadvantageous
is that malware scanning on the mail server often requires significant modifications to the existing mail
server configuration. However, this option provides a number of advantages:
• Can scan email in both directions (inbound and outbound)
• Can be centrally managed to ensure compliance with the organization's security policy and that
updates are applied regularly
• Offers protection to internal users once malware is on the organization's internal network.
Scanning for malware at the mail server has a number of weaknesses:
• May require significant modification of the existing mail server configuration (less true for most
newer mail servers) 
• Cannot scan encrypted emails
• May require more powerful (expensive) servers to handle the load of a large organization.
• Can detect only those threats that have been identified; offers little protection against zero-day
exploits.
When considering mail server-based malware scanners, look for the following qualities:
• Detects and cleans all types of malware typically carried by email (e.g., viruses, worms, Trojan
horses, malicious mobile code, spyware)
• Provides heuristic scanning (provides some protection from new and unknown malware)
• Provides content filtering (see Section 6.2.2)
• Incorporates mechanisms to help prevent email from circumventing the system
• Provides ease of management
• Provides automated downloading and installation of updates
• Provides frequent updates (critical)
• Can identify and apply rules to different types of content
• Provides a robust and configurable alert mechanism
• Provides detailed logging capabilities (see Section 9.1).
6.2.1.3 Scanning on Client Hosts
Malware scanners can also be located on client hosts (see Figure 6.3). This type of malware scanner is
installed on user workstations and mobile devices, such as personal digital assistants (PDA). Incoming
emails are scanned as they are opened by the user, and outbound emails are checked as the user attempts
to send them. The primary advantage of this type of configuration is that scanning is distributed across
many hosts and therefore has minimal effect on the performance of each individual host. Also, if a client
machine becomes infected with malware, this layer of protection might stop the malware from spreading
to the mail server and other mail clients. 
The greatest challenge of implementing malware scanning on user workstations is the difficulty in
managing and regularly updating the distributed malware scanners. However, enterprise-level solutions
for malware scanning provide a means of central administration of malware scanners on individual hosts.
Another weakness is that to the degree that users have control of the malware scanner, end users may
disable some or all of its functionality (whether accidentally or intentionally). Enterprise solutions offer
the capability to lock down some or all of the clients' scanners' functionality to ensure they are
configured correctly.
The benefits of client-side malware scanning are as follows:
• Does not require any modification to the mail server
• Can scan encrypted emails when they are decrypted by the user
• Distributes malware scanning and thus minimizes the impact of scanning on any one host
• Offers protection to internal users, even when malware is received from an internal user.
The disadvantages of client-side malware scanning are as follows:
• Can be difficult to centrally manage, especially for mobile client hosts (e.g., laptops)
• Can take time before users update malware scanners, resulting in the organization being more
susceptible to an outbreak
• Can be intentionally or accidentally disabled or weakened by users.
• Can detect only those threats that have been identified; offers little protection against zero-day
exploits.
6.2.2 Content Filtering
Content filtering works in a similar manner to malware scanning at the firewall or mail server except that
it is looking for emails containing undesirable content other than malware, such as spam or emails 
containing inappropriate language. When implementing file-type restrictions and malware scanning, only
a certain level of security is provided. The contents of an email message or its attachments could prove
much more damaging to an organization than a virus or rogue executable. For this case, some sort of
content filtering mechanism should be employed.
6.2.2.1 Implementing Content Filters
For maximum effectiveness, content filtering should be performed on all incoming and outgoing
messages and conducted in the same locations as malware scanning—on the firewall/mail relay/mail
gateway, mail servers, and end users' hosts. In fact, many products are available for popular messaging
systems that incorporate content filtering, malware scanning, and file-type restriction (see Appendix D for
a listing of common products). Incorporation of these features into one product can reduce the
administration of security controls.
In general, rules are defined to forward, quarantine, park, clean, block, or delete any data passing through
the server depending upon the results of the scan. Typical items that would be caught by the filter and
possible actions taken on them could be as follows:
• Email that contains suspicious active content (e.g., ActiveX, JavaScript) is stripped of the active code
and forwarded to the recipient.
• Spam email and phishing attempts may be deleted or tagged as suspicious.
• Extra-large files might be held for delivery during off-peak hours.
Another key feature of content filtering packages is the scanning of outbound data. A lexical analysis can
be performed that scans email messages for words and phrases that might be viewed as inappropriate for
use in organizational email. The lexical analysis can also save possible litigation against an organization
by preventing inappropriate content, including hoaxes and spam (see Section 6.3), from leaving the
organization. In addition, a lexical analysis might include searches for key words and phrases indicating
that sensitive data is leaving the enterprise.
Organizations should also take steps to prevent email address spoofing, such as ensuring that external
users cannot send emails to internal users that have one of the organization's email addresses as the
spoofed sender. For example, a hypothetical company WidgetsRUs should block any incoming email
with a "from" address in the domain widgetsrus.com at its mail gateway. Attackers often spoof email
addresses to make their malicious emails appear to be from internal users, because it can trick users into
trusting the emails. Checking digital signatures on emails is a way that users can detect some spoofing
attempts.
Before implementing any filtering solution, it is imperative to determine how the existing network and
applications actually work. This entails running network analyzers (sniffers); analyzing router, firewall,
and server log files; and interviewing all appropriate system and network administrators. It is also
imperative to analyze the existing organization information system security policy, or draft one if one
does not exist. Clearly defined security policies are critical to translating the organization's security goals
into filter rules. Great care must be taken in crafting the rules because an incorrectly configured filter
may fail to filter inappropriate content or may accidentally filter appropriate content. These steps will 
make it easier to choose the appropriate filtering software and determine the types of rules that need to be
configured.
Another effective way to decrease the number of unwanted messages reaching mail servers is using
Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP) lookup on a mail gateway or firewall as a filtering
mechanism. LDAP lookup allows the gateway or firewall to query the organization's user directory
directly for user information. When an email is received by the gateway or firewall, it contacts the user
directory to see if the email is addressed to a user that actually exists. If the user is not in the directory,
the email is rejected and does not reach the mail server. Much of the spam sent to a domain is generated
using a database of common usernames. Most of these addresses do not exist for a particular domain, but
it is an easy method for spammers to get their messages to many users quickly. Using LDAP lookup
prevents these messages from slowing the mail server.
Many Internet service providers (ISP) and third-party companies offer malware scanning and content
filtering services, including spam filtering. These services can be helpful for organizations that wish to
add an extra layer of defense but do not want to implement or maintain the extra layer of protection
themselves. The services delete or tag messages before they reach an organization's mail server,
therefore increasing its efficiency. Because these services may monitor emails for many organizations,
they can often identify new unwanted messages very quickly. Disadvantages of using such a service
include the following:
• Privacy. All of the organization's incoming email is routed through the service provider's servers
and scanned by them.
• False Positives. The service provider's filtering solution might automatically delete emails tagged as
spam or might not provide a way for administrators to check the validity of email tagging.
• Availability. If the service becomes unavailable, the organization should be able to change the
routing of email to prevent delays in mail delivery.
6.2.2.2 Content Filtering Issues
Although email content filtering is critical to most organizations' security posture, a number of legal
implications should be addressed before deployment. Content filtering needs to be backed up by a clearly
defined written security policy. The email policy should include an explicit statement that email will be
monitored for compliance, a description of any administrative or disciplinary actions that could result if
the policy is violated, and a requirement for employees to acknowledge reading and understanding the
policy. Although the policy should outline the organization's thinking, expectations, and restrictions
regarding security, due regard should also be given to employee and individual rights. For instance,
under some circumstances employees may have a right to privacy when it comes to their own
correspondence; however, when representing their organization, the organization may be held legally
responsible for what they say or do. Without an established policy, such issues often lead to
misunderstanding and problems that can be difficult to resolve.
Similarly, in some situations, email messages may be deemed to carry the same legal weight as written
documents, especially when digitally signed. This can mean having to store messages to comply with
record-keeping requirements, including employees' personal messages. As such, all employees should be
made aware of the security policy. To the extent possible, the security policy should be broadly
distributed to employees [McKi01]. Moreover, it may be advisable to require employees to acknowledge
the policy as part of their contract of employment or as a condition of working on a contract, and to also
require employees to re-acknowledge the policy on a regular basis. Many email filter applications can 
add a legal disclaimer to all incoming and outgoing messages, ensuring recipients understand the legal
weight (or lack thereof) of the emails received from or through the organization.
Appropriate legal, privacy, personnel, and human resources authorities should be consulted when forming
the policy. Inevitably, this means having the policy reviewed by experts to ensure that it is legally correct
and does not infringe upon the rights of employees. Additionally, it is important to investigate all areas of
an organization to determine how workers go about their work and what level of security is most
appropriate. Completely restricting access to Internet resources might solve most security issues at a
stroke, but this is usually an unacceptable tradeoff. This is where email filtering tools can help, enabling
security policies to be more easily converted from theory into practice.
As previously mentioned, personal email accounts are problematic, especially those accessed via a Web
browser that tend to bypass the email content filtering controls. In particular, if a user is using an SSL-encrypted Web page for personal email access and the organization does not decrypt and analyze SSL-encrypted HTTPS traffic, the content may be allowed out or in even though it would not be if it went
through normal channels. Many organizations also allow encrypted protocols outbound (e.g., from their
internal network to the Internet) such as SSH or IPsec that can also be used to tunnel traffic in or out of
the organization without the restrictions of filtering.
If an organization allows mail protocols, such as SMTP, outbound to the Internet for all internal users,
content filtering may be bypassed by users setting up their own mail servers. Organizations should be
aware that certain products and applications use SMTP email for communications. It is not uncommon in
large organizations for a significant percentage of the outbound email traffic to be generated by servers
other than the centralized enterprise mail servers. Often these emails are generated from electronic
commerce applications communicating with customers or business partners. One way to address the
problem is to set up a mail gateway or application proxy at the perimeter that does content filtering on all
email, even those messages generated by or destined to servers other than the centralized enterprise mail
servers. Section 7 provides additional information on network architectures and mail gateway
placements.
6.2.3 User Awareness
In addition to using anti-virus software and/or other malware scanning tools, as well as content filtering
software, organizations should educate users about the dangers posed by email-borne malware and
effective ways of avoiding threats, including the following actions:
• Never open attachments from unknown senders.
• Never open attachments with suspicious or potentially harmful names or file extensions (e.g.,
attachment.txt.vbs, attachment.exe) from known or unknown senders.
• Be suspicious of emails from known senders in which the subject line or content appears to be
inappropriate for the existing relationship (e.g., an email with the subject "I love you" from a
professional colleague) or generic subjects (e.g., "Look at this, it's interesting").
• Scan all attachments with malware scanning software before opening, preferably by configuring the
scanning software to automatically perform this task.
• Update the signature database of the malware scanning software at least on a daily basis or when
there is a malware outbreak.
• Warn users about malware outbreaks and how to identify emails that might contain malware. 
Users should also be aware of the dangers of phishing attacks and how to avoid them. The Federal Trade
Commission (FTC) posted a consumer alert outlining steps that users should take: [FTC06]
• Do not reply to email messages or popup ads asking for personal or financial information.
• Do not trust phone numbers in emails or popup ads. Voice over IP technology can be used to register
a phone with any area code.
• Do not email personal or financial information.
• Review credit card and bank account statements regularly.
• Be cautious about accessing untrusted Web sites, because some Web browser vulnerabilities can be
exploited simply by visiting a site. Users should also be cautious about opening any attachment or
downloading any file from untrusted emails or Web sites.
• Forward phishing-related emails to spam@uce.gov and to the organization that is impersonated in the
email.
• Request a copy of your credit report from each of the three credit reporting agencies yearly: Equifax,
Transunion, and Experian. If an identity thief opens up accounts in your name, they will likely show
up on a credit report.
6.3 Blocking Spam-Sending Servers
Regardless of the communication medium, there are always entities that attempt to exploit any means of
communication to publicize their ideas or products. Email is no exception. The most common terms for
these messages are unsolicited commercial email (UCE), which is better known as spam. Most email
users receive spam on a daily basis. Because email is largely unregulated, system administrators should
police email traffic that traverses the servers they operate to reduce the amount of spam that reaches users.
An added benefit of implementing server-based spam control is that it will reduce mailbox sizes, which in
turn reduces server storage requirements.
To control spam messages, administrators must address the following three concerns:
• Ensure that spam cannot be sent from the mail servers they control (see Section 6.4).
• Implement spam filtering for inbound messages (see Section 6.2).
• Block messages from known spam-sending servers—the topic of this section.
Because the Internet has no centralized policing authority, non-profit organizations and commercial
companies have created lists of mail servers that have been identified as being used to send unsolicited
email messages. These lists are often referred to as open relay blacklists (ORB) or DNS blacklists
(DNSBL). Many popular mail server applications can be configured to query multiple ORBs and reject
messages originating from the listed mail servers. These lists are updated on a daily basis; therefore,
using them can drastically reduce spam message delivery. Additionally, most mail servers can be
configured to reject messages from an explicitly defined set of domains. 
ORB spam control is not foolproof. Open relays are connected and disconnected regularly. Mail server
administrators who wish to participate in the policing effort may submit UCE complaints to Web sites
provided in Appendix E.
6.4 Authenticated Mail Relay
As mentioned previously, configuring mail relay authentication decreases the likelihood of someone
using a particular mail server to send spam. An added benefit of implementing authenticated relay is
increased security and usability.
Two methods are available for controlling mail relay. The first is to control the subnet or domain from
which messages are being sent. This method is effective if the perimeter of the messaging system resides
within known address ranges. However, if remote users have hosts with different address ranges, this
method is not useful. To accommodate remote users, a more robust configuration is needed.
The second method is to require users to authenticate themselves before sending any messages. This is
commonly referred to as authenticated relay, or SMTP AUTH, which is the SMTP extension that supports
user authentication. Unfortunately, the default configuration of most mail servers does not implement
authenticated relay; therefore, mail server administrators must configure the server appropriately.
Requiring authenticated relay is one of the least used but most powerful security features of mail servers.
(Refer to manufacturer documentation for configuring SMTP AUTH.)
Mail server administrators must use caution if choosing to have an authenticated relay. An improperly
configured mail server could be exploited and used to send or relay spam. If the mail server is found to
be an open relay, it might be put on a blacklist (as described in Section 6.3). Any organizations
subscribing to and using these blacklists will not be able to receive any email from a blacklisted server,
whether the messages are spam or valid emails.
If a mail server administrator learns that one of his or her mail servers is on a blacklist, the administrator
will have to fix the open relay problem and perform testing to ensure the server is no longer relaying. The
administrator then needs to determine which blacklists the server is on and check with each blacklist
maintainer to get instructions on how to remove the server from the lists. Until the server has been
removed from all blacklists and the updated blacklists have been propagated to their subscribers,
outbound email from the organization may not reach all of its recipients. See Appendix D for a listing of
Web sites that provide open relay testing tools as well as the maintainers of commonly used blacklists.
6.5 Secure Access
In Section 2, different mail transport and mailbox access protocols were discussed. Like many Internet
protocols, most of these protocols did not initially incorporate any form of encryption or cryptographic
authentication. These deficits posed three problems for email users. First, for users sending messages,
the contents could be intercepted and read at any host on the path between the sender and recipient or
even forged or modified. An apt paradigm from "regular" mail would be a postcard. Any person who
handles the postcard could read the message on the back. Second, the recipients could not verify that
messages were not modified by others during transit or actually originated by the sender. Third, rather
than supplying non-reusable authentication information, a user accessing a mailbox would send a
password over the network in the clear, which could be easily observed and reused by an attacker.
Unfortunately, in most default configurations, mail clients are set up to send the user's password in the
clear, allowing it to be intercepted by other computers on the local network segment of the client or any
host responsible for forwarding the password to the mail server. 
The first two problems were addressed in Section 3, which discussed ways to protect messages. The third
problem can be resolved by applying the same method normally used to secure World Wide Web
(WWW) traffic – the Transport Layer Security (TLS) protocol.
TLS is similar to the Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) protocol, upon which it is based, and can be used in
combination with POP, IMAP, and SMTP to encrypt communication between mail clients and servers.
RFC 2595 defines how to use TLS to combat communications eavesdropping, to implement secure
mailbox access and to further strengthen SMTP MTAs that incorporate SMTP AUTH. Figure 6.4 shows
a sample configuration that enables TLS support for newer versions of sendmail. 
6.6 Enabling Web Access
Increasingly, organizations are providing Web browser-based access to their messaging systems.
Enabling this type of access could introduce security issues at both the client (see Section 8.4) and server.
Although Web site security is outside the scope of this document, there are several key concepts that
should be followed:
• Avoid placing the Web server on the same machine as the mail server.
• The authentication mechanism of the Web front-end should employ encryption.
• The Web server should use SSL/TLS to encrypt all communications with clients.
• As with any public server, the Web server should be hardened before connecting it to the network.
For some organizations, the processing requirements of dedicating a Web server to SSL/TLS
communication may not be possible to accommodate. In cases such as this, the initial authentication
should be encrypted.
Some organizations choose to use hardware appliances for their Web access solution. These appliances
not only provide secure Web-based access to mail servers, but they also provide firewall, content filtering,
and malware protection capabilities. The appliances typically are easier and faster to install and maintain
than creating Web servers, and they often use hardened operating systems with all non-essential
components disabled or removed, which limits the possible vulnerabilities the appliances might have.
Some appliances offer additional capabilities, such as offering administrators granular control over user
groups and access, performing SSL encryption for sessions, and terminating user sessions automatically 
after a period of inactivity. Appliances are available that support the most commonly used Web-based
mail systems.
Client security issues exist that also need to be considered before an organization approves the
deployment of Web access to email. These issues are discussed in Section 8.4.
6.7 Checklist for Securing Mail Servers and Content 
7. Implementing a Secure Network Infrastructure
The network infrastructure that supports the mail server plays a critical role in the security of the mail
server. In most configurations, the network infrastructure is the first line of defense between the Internet
and a mail server. Network design alone, however, cannot protect a mail server. The frequency,
sophistication, and variety of attacks perpetrated today lend support to the idea that email security must be
implemented through layered and diverse protection mechanisms. This section discusses those network
components that can support and protect mail servers to further enhance their overall security. While
security issues are paramount, network infrastructure considerations are influenced by many factors other
than security, including cost, performance, and reliability.
7.1 Network Composition and Structure
Firewalls and routers are devices or systems that control the flow of network traffic between networks.
They can protect mail servers from vulnerabilities inherent in the Transmission Control Protocol/Internet
Protocol (TCP/IP) suite and help reduce the security issues associated with insecure applications and
operating systems. However, an organization has many choices when determining a network
environment for the mail server, and security may not be the principal factor in deciding among those
options. Network composition and structure are the first and in many respects the most critical decisions
that affect mail server security, since they determine what network infrastructure elements protect the
mail server. For example, if the mail server is located before the organization's main firewall, then the
firewall cannot be used to control traffic to and from the mail server. Network composition and structure
also determine what other portions of the network are vulnerable if the mail server is compromised. For
example, an externally accessible mail server located on the internal production network subjects the
internal network to attack if the mail server is compromised.
7.1.1 Inadvisable Network Layout
Some organizations choose to locate their public mail servers on their internal production networks. That
is, their mail servers reside on the same network as the internal users and servers. The principal weakness
of this layout is that it exposes internal network components to additional risks. Mail servers are often
targets of attackers. If attackers manage to compromise a mail server, they will have access to the internal
network and be able to more easily compromise internal hosts. Therefore, this layout is not
recommended.
Another network layout that is not generally recommended is placing the mail server before an
organization's firewall or router that provides IP filtering. In this structure, the network provides little, if
any, protection for the mail server. Because the mail server itself has to maintain security, it provides a
single point of failure. To be even somewhat secure in this location, the mail server operating system and
application have to be well-hardened, with all unnecessary and insecure services disabled and all
necessary security patches applied. To maintain the "security" of the setup, the mail server administrator
must stay up-to-date on vulnerabilities and related patches. Another limitation of this structure is that
providing any sort of secure remote administration capability is difficult.
7.1.2 Demilitarized Zone
A demilitarized zone (DMZ) describes a host or network segment inserted as a "neutral zone" between an
organization's private network and the Internet. It prevents outside users of the mail server from gaining
direct access to an organization's internal network (intranet). A DMZ mitigates the risks of locating a
mail server on an internal network or exposing it directly to the Internet. It is a compromise solution that
offers the most benefits with the least amount of risk for most organizations. The DMZ allows access to 
the resources located within it to both internal and external users. There are a wide variety of DMZ
configurations, each with its own strengths and weaknesses.
Creating a DMZ involves placing a firewall between an organization's border router and its internal
network, and creating a new network segment that can only be reached through the DMZ device. The
mail server or mail gateway is placed on the new segment, along with other network infrastructure
components and servers that need to be externally accessible. For example, if Web-based mail access is
offered, the associated servers are typically placed on the DMZ. In some configurations, the border router
itself may act as a basic firewall. Figure 7.1 illustrates an example of this simple DMZ using a router
with access control lists (ACL) to restrict certain types of network traffic to and from the DMZ. 
A single-firewall DMZ is a low-cost approach, since the organization needs only to add a single firewall
and use its existing border router to provide protection to the DMZ. It is usually appropriate only for
small organizations that face a minimal threat. The basic weakness in the approach is that while the
router is able to protect against most network attacks, it is not "aware" of the mail server application layer
protocols (e.g., SMTP, POP, IMAP) and thus cannot protect against application layer attacks aimed at the
mail server. In addition, a router cannot provide any virus scanning of incoming email. A superior
approach is to add a second firewall between the Internet and the DMZ, as shown in Figure 7.2. 
A two-firewall DMZ configuration improves protection over a router-firewall DMZ, since the dedicated
firewalls can have more complex and powerful security rule sets. In addition, because a dedicated
firewall is often able to analyze incoming and outgoing mail traffic, it can detect and defend against
application layer attacks aimed at the mail server. Depending on the rule sets of the firewalls and the
level of traffic the DMZ receives, this type of DMZ may result in some performance degradation.
For organizations that desire the security of the two-firewall DMZ, but do not have the resources to
purchase two firewalls, another option exists called the "service leg" DMZ. In this configuration, a
firewall is constructed with three (or more) network interfaces. One network interface attaches to the
border router, another interface attaches to the internal network, and a third interface connects to the DMZ
(see Figure 7.3). 
This configuration subjects the firewall to an increased risk of service degradation during a DoS attack
aimed at the DMZ. In the standard single-firewall DMZ network configuration discussed above, a DoS
attack against the mail server generally affects only the mail server. In a service-leg DMZ network 
configuration, the firewall bears the brunt of any DoS attack because it must examine any network traffic
before the traffic reaches the mail server (or any other DMZ or internal network resource) [Wack02a].
However, it is increasingly likely that a DoS attack will take the form of a distributed denial of service
(DDoS) attack and consume all of the incoming network bandwidth and related devices (e.g., Internet
border routers) before ever reaching a DMZ firewall.
The advantages of a DMZ from a security standpoint are as follows:
• The mail server may be better protected, and network traffic to and from the mail server can be
monitored.
• Compromise of the mail server does not directly threaten the internal production network.
• Greater control can be provided over the security of the mail server since traffic to and from the mail
server can be controlled.
• The DMZ network configuration can be optimized to support and protect the mail servers.
The disadvantages of a DMZ from a security standpoint are as follows:
• DoS attacks aimed at the mail server may have an effect on the internal network.
• Depending on the firewall configuration controlling traffic between the DMZ and internal network, it
may be possible for the mail server to be used to attack or compromise hosts on the internal network.
In other words, protection offered by the DMZ depends in large part on the firewall configuration.
7.1.3 Mail Gateways
Using a mail gateway in the DMZ adds further protection for a mail server. The additional layer makes
the mail server significantly more difficult to attack. When a mail server is located in the DMZ, it still
must communicate with untrusted third parties, which provides an avenue for attackers. A mail gateway
acts as a proxy between the real mail server and the Internet. All messages and communications must go
through the proxy before they are forwarded to the mail server. Breaking the direct line of
communication between the Internet and the mail server makes it much more difficult to attack the mail
server. Since the mail gateway generally requires only limited functionality, it is much easier to harden
and secure than a fully functional mail server. Figure 7.4 provides an example of using a mail gateway to
fortify a mail server on the internal network. 
7.1.4 Management Network
Mail servers, gateways, and other important components can be connected to each other and managed
through an organization's standard networks or through a separate network known as a management
network. If a management network is used, each host being managed through the network has an
additional network interface known as a management interface that connects to the management network.
Also, each host being managed is unable to pass any traffic between its management interface and any of
its other network interfaces. Consoles and other hosts that are used to manage the mail components are
attached to the management network only. This architecture effectively isolates the management network
from the production networks. The benefits of doing this are to protect the components from some
attacks and to ensure that the components can be managed under adverse conditions (e.g., widespread
email-borne malware infection). Disadvantages of using a management network include the additional
costs in networking equipment and other hardware (e.g., PCs for the consoles) and the inconvenience for
mail component administrators of using separate computers for management and monitoring.
7.2 Network Element Configuration
Once the mail server has been positioned in the network, the network infrastructure elements should be
configured to support and protect it. The elements of a network infrastructure that affect mail server
security are firewalls, routers, intrusion detection and intrusion prevention systems, and switches. Each
has an important role to play and is critical to the overall strategy of protecting the mail server through
layered protection. Unfortunately, when it comes to securing a mail server, there is no single "silver
bullet" solution. A firewall or intrusion prevention system alone cannot adequately protect a mail server
from all threats or attacks.
7.2.1 Router/Firewall Configuration
Several types of firewalls exist. The most basic ones are routers that can provide access control on IP
packets. In the middle are stateful firewalls that can provide access control based on TCP and User 
Datagram Protocol (UDP) as well as IP. The most powerful firewalls are application layer or proxy
firewalls that are able to understand and filter email content and commands.
A common misperception about firewalls and routers (acting as firewalls) is that they eliminate all risk
and can protect against the misconfiguration of the mail server or poor network design. Unfortunately,
this is not the case. Firewalls and routers themselves are vulnerable to misconfiguration and software
vulnerabilities. In addition, most firewalls have limited or no "insight" into the application layer where
many current attacks occur. Thus mail servers in particular are vulnerable to many attacks, even when
located behind a secure, well-configured firewall.
A firewall or router (acting as a firewall) that is protecting a mail server should be configured to block all
access to the mail server from the Internet except the necessary ports, such as TCP port 25 (SMTP). A
firewall is the first line of defense for a mail server; however, to be truly secure, organizations need to
implement layered protection for their mail servers (and networks). Most importantly, organizations
should strive to maintain all systems in a secure posture and not depend solely on routers, firewalls, or
any other single component to stop attackers.
A modern enterprise router is able to function as a network and transport layer filter (e.g., a basic
firewall). A router functioning as a network/transport layer firewall can provide filtering based on several
pieces of information [Wack02a], including the following:
• Source IP address
• Destination IP address
• Traffic type
• TCP/UDP port number and state.
The strengths of routers are in the following areas:
• Cost (most organizations already have a border router that can be configured to provide
network/transport layer firewall capabilities).
The weaknesses of routers are in the following areas:
• Susceptibility to application layer attacks (e.g., cannot examine email content or commands)
• Susceptibility to attacks via allowed ports (routers are generally weaker than firewalls in this area
because the routers do not perform analysis at the application layer, but the firewalls do, allowing the
firewalls to recognize some attacks sent via allowed ports)
• Difficulty of configuration and administration
• Limitations in logging capabilities
• Processing capabilities may be more limited and overtaxed by complex rule sets (i.e., access controls
lists)
• Insufficient rule set expressiveness and filtering capabilities. 
The only "pure" network layer firewalls available today are small office/home office (SOHO) firewall
appliances and personal firewalls [Wack02a] that may only perform basic packet-level filtering.
Stateful inspection firewalls are transport layer devices that incorporate "awareness" of the state of a TCP
connection. Stateful inspection firewalls maintain internal information such as the state of the
connections passing through and the contents of some of the data streams. This allows better and more
accurate rule sets and filtering to be specified. Stateful inspection firewalls add the capability to enforce
rules based on connection state to the capabilities of a filtering router.
Application layer firewalls (sometimes called application-proxy gateway firewalls) are advanced firewalls
that combine network and transport layer access control with application layer functionality. Application
layer firewalls permit no traffic directly between the Internet and the internal network, or between two
networks. They can usually perform extensive logging and access control.
Application layer firewalls are considered the most secure type of firewall and have numerous advantages
over packet filtering routers and stateful inspection firewalls, including the following areas:
• Logging capabilities
• Filtering capabilities (can filter specific types of email content and specific SMTP, POP, and IMAP
commands)
• Ease of configuration
• User authentication capabilities.
The primary disadvantages that application layer firewalls have when compared to packet filtering routers
and stateful inspection firewalls are as follows:
• Speed of throughput.
• Cost (if high end hardware is required to operate effectively)
• Support for less popular and new protocols.
Although not strictly a limitation, application layer firewalls are sometimes implemented on hosts running
general-purpose operating systems (e.g., Windows, Linux, Unix). This arrangement introduces an added
layer of complexity because that general-purpose operating system must also be secured in addition to the
firewall software itself. Application layer firewalls are increasingly being deployed as appliance-based
devices, which may use specialized operating systems. Routers and stateful inspection firewalls also
typically run on specialized operating systems.
To successfully protect a mail server using a firewall, ensure that the firewall is patched to the latest or
most secure level (application and underlying operating system) and is both capable of and configured to
support the following items:
• Control all traffic between the Internet and the mail server
• Block all inbound traffic to the mail server except that traffic which is required, such as TCP port 25
(SMTP).
• Block (in conjunction with the intrusion detection or prevention system [see Section 7.2.2]) IP
addresses or subnets that the IDS or IPS reports are attacking the organizational network 
• Block known "blacklisted" networks or subnets as identified by a trusted external security response
center
• Notify the network or mail server administrator of suspicious activity through an appropriate means
(e.g., page, email, network trap)
• Provide content filtering
• Provide malware scanning
• Protect against DoS attacks
• Log critical events, including the following details:
– Time/date
– Interface IP address
– Manufacturer-specific event name
– Standard attack event identifier (if one exists)
– Source and destination IP addresses
– Source and destination port numbers
– Network protocol.
Most firewall devices available in hardware and software perform some type of logging of the traffic they
receive. For most firewalls, the default logging configuration is suitable, provided logging is enabled.
Administrators should consult their manufacturer documentation if they believe they require additional
information to be logged. Certain brands of hardware-based firewalls include an ability to track and log
information for each rule. This ability enables accountability to a very specific extent.
Many firewalls support the ability to selectively decide what information to log. If a firewall receives a
series of similar packets from the same location, it may decide not to log any additional packets after the
first one. Although this is a valuable feature, consider the consequences: each packet that is dropped and
not logged is potential evidence of malicious intent. The principle of logging, a fundamental aspect of
accountability, is discussed in detail in Section 9.1.
As with operating systems and other security-enforcing elements, a firewall requires updates. Although
more prevalent in software implementations of firewall technology, hardware and router firewalls are
capable of updating their firmware. Specific instructions on how to update a firewall are found within the
manufacturer documentation. Administrators should check for firewall updates frequently.
7.2.2 Intrusion Detection and Prevention Systems
An intrusion detection system (IDS) is an application that monitors the events occurring in a system or
network and analyzes them for signs of potential incidents, which are violations or imminent threats of
violation of computer security policies, acceptable use policies, or standard security practices. An
intrusion prevention system (IPS) has all the capabilities of an IDS and can also attempt to stop potential 
incidents. Because IDS and IPS systems offer many of the same capabilities, they are often collectively
called intrusion detection and prevention systems (IDPS). When an IDPS detects a potential incident, it
notifies administrators through IDPS console messages, emails, pages, or other mechanisms.
The two types of IDPSs most relevant for email security are host-based and network-based. A host-based IDPS monitors the characteristics of a single host and the events occurring within that host to
identify and stop suspicious activity. Host-based IDPS software must be installed on each individual
computer that is to be monitored or protected. Host-based IDPSs are very closely integrated with the
operating system of the host computer they protect. Thus, a host-based IDPS must be designed
specifically for each operating system (and often each version of that operating system). Host-based
IDPSs monitor various aspects of hosts, such as network traffic, system logs, running processes, file
access and modification, and system and application configuration changes.
Host-based IDPSs are especially useful when most of the network traffic to and from the mail server is
encrypted (e.g., SSL/TLS or S/MIME is in use) because the functionality and capability of network-based
IDPSs (see below) are severely limited when network traffic is encrypted. Also, because they are located
on the server, host-based IDPSs can detect some attacks and penetration attempts not recognized by
network-based IDPSs. Unfortunately, host-based IDPSs can have a negative impact on host performance.
In general, enabling more extensive detection capabilities and monitoring more events cause a greater
negative impact on the performance of the host. Host-based IDPSs may not detect some network-based
attacks such as certain DoS attacks. If a host-based IDPS is on a mail server that is compromised, it is
very likely that the attacker will also compromise the IDPS itself and vice versa.
A network-based IDPS monitors network traffic for particular network segments or network devices and
analyzes the network and application protocol activity to identify and stop suspicious activity. Most
network-based IDPSs use predefined "attack signatures" to detect and identify attacks. Attack signatures
are patterns that correspond to known types of intrusions. Network-based IDPSs also use other detection
methods to identify anomalous activity, protocol violations, and other unusual activity.
Unlike a host-based IDPS, a network-based IDPS can monitor network activity for many hosts
simultaneously. Network-based IDPSs can usually detect more network-based attacks and can more
easily provide a comprehensive picture of the current attacks against a network. Since network-based
IDPSs are installed on dedicated hosts, they do not have a negative effect on the performance of the mail
server host and are not immediately compromised by a successful attack on the mail server.
Network-based IDPSs do have some limitations. The timing of an attack can have a significant effect on
the ability of a network-based IDPS to detect an attack. For example, if an attacker spreads out the timing
of his attack over a period of hours or days, the attack may not be detected by the IDPS. Network
configuration, such as the use of asymmetric routing, can have a negative effect on the ability of a
network-based IDPS to detect attacks. Network-based IDPSs are also more susceptible to being disabled
by DoS attacks (even those not directly targeted at the IDPS). Also, depending on how the network-based
IDPS is integrated into the network, it is possible to negatively impact the availability of the network in
the event of an IDPS hardware failure.
Most host-based and network-based IDPSs require frequent updates to their attack signature databases so
that they can recognize new attacks. An IDPS that is not updated frequently will fail to recognize the
latest (and often most popular) attacks. Both types of IDPSs may be limited in their ability to detect zero-day attacks because it is unlikely that an appropriate signature is available. A host-based IDPS may have
a better chance of detecting a zero-day attack since it is better able to detect the actions taken by an
attacker after a successful exploit (e.g., new unauthorized privileged accounts, installation of malicious
software).
File integrity checkers are a simple form of host-based IDPS. A file integrity checker computes and
stores a hash for every guarded file and establishes a database of file hashes. It provides a tool for system
administrators to recognize changes to files, particularly unauthorized changes. File integrity checkers
are available both as standalone products and bundled with other host-based IDPS techniques. Some
host-based IDPSs can monitor file access attempts and stop suspicious attempts to read, modify, delete,
and execute files. A host-based IDPS with this capability could be configured to protect important mail
server files.
To successfully protect a mail server using an IDPS, ensure that the IDPS is capable of and configured to:
• Monitor network traffic to and from the mail server
• Monitor changes to critical files on the mail server (file integrity checking capability)
• Monitor the system resources available on the mail server host (host-based)
• Block (in conjunction with the firewall) IP addresses or subnets that are attacking the organizational
network
• Notify the necessary parties (e.g., IDPS administrator, mail server administrator, incident response
team) of suspected attacks through appropriate means according to the organizational incident
response policy and procedures
• Detect as wide a variety of scanning and attacks as possible with an acceptable level of false positives
• Log events, including the following details:
– Time/date
– Sensor IP address
– Manufacturer-specific attack name
– Standard attack name (if one exists)
– Source and destination IP addresses
– Source and destination port numbers
– Network protocol.
• For network events, packet header information should be captured to assist with the analysis and
forensics process
• Update with new attack signatures frequently (e.g., on a daily to weekly basis, typically after testing
the updates). 
In addition, it is critical that network-based IDPSs and their underlying operating systems are hardened,
as network-based IDPSs are often a target of attackers. In particular, the network-based IDPSs should not
respond to any type of system interrogation through their monitoring interfaces. If remote management is
desired, it should be conducted through an out-of-band means (e.g., separate isolated network). Although
typically difficult to administer and interpret, IDPSs are a critical early warning system that can provide
the mail server administrator with the necessary information to defend the mail server from attack.
[Scar07]
7.2.3 Network Switches
Network switches are devices that provide connectivity between two or more hosts located on the same
network segments. They are similar to hubs in that they allow communications between hosts, but unlike
hubs the switches have more "intelligence" and send communications to only those hosts to which the
communications are addressed. The benefit of this from a security standpoint is that when switches are
employed on a network, it is much more difficult to eavesdrop on communications between other hosts on
the network segment. This is extremely important when a mail server is on a network segment that is
used by other hosts. For example, if a hub is used and a host on the DMZ is compromised, an attacker
may be able to eavesdrop on the communications of other hosts on the DMZ, possibly leading to the
compromise of those hosts or the information they communicate across the network. A primary example
of this is public Web servers, which are often on the same subnet as mail servers and, if compromised,
would be able to sniff unencrypted email traffic and passwords within the DMZ.
Many switches include specific security settings that further enhance the security of the network by
making it difficult for a malicious entity to "defeat" the switch. Some examples include the ability to
minimize the risk of Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) spoofing and ARP poisoning attacks. If a
switch has these security capabilities, they should be enabled (see appropriate manufacturer
documentation).
Switches can have a negative impact on network-based IDPSs (see Section 7.2.2). Most network
switches allow network administrators to configure a specific port on the switch, known as a span port, so
that it replicates all the switch's traffic to the port used by the IDPS. This allows a network-based IDPS
to see all traffic on a particular network segment. However, under high loads, the switch might have to
stop sending traffic to the span port, causing the IDPS to be unable to monitor network activity. Also,
other devices also use span ports, and there are typically very few span ports on a switch, so it might not
be possible to connect an IDPS to a particular switch because its span ports are all being used. 
7.3 Checklist for Implementing a Secure Network Infrastructure 
8. Securing Mail Clients
Hundreds to thousands of mail clients access every operational mail server. Regardless of the security in
place on mail servers, it is important to secure the client side. In many respects, the client side represents
a greater risk to security than the mail server. Numerous issues need to be carefully considered and
addressed to provide an appropriate level of security for mail clients. This section provides general
recommendations that apply to most mail client applications. Specific recommendations for securing
particular applications are not included in this document.
8.1 Installing and Configuring Client Applications
8.1.1 Patching and Updating Mail Clients
The most important step in securing a mail client is to ensure that all users are using the latest and/or most
secure version of the mail client with all necessary patches applied. Most major mail clients have had
significant vulnerabilities. To identify the vulnerabilities of a particular mail client, see the NIST
National Vulnerability Database (NVD) (http://nvd.nist.gov/). The best resource for patches is the
appropriate manufacturer's Web site. Appendix E contains a list of mail client manufacturer Web sites.
Updating some mail clients is made slightly more complicated because they operate in conjunction with
Web browsers. For example, the close integration and bundling of Microsoft Outlook, a mail client, and
Internet Explorer, a Web browser, has allowed the configuration settings and vulnerabilities of the latter
to affect the former. In such situations, keeping both the mail client and Web browser updated to secure
versions and patch levels is particularly important. Failure to run a secure version of a mail client reduces
the effectiveness of the rest of the security measures discussed below.
8.1.2 Configuring Mail Client Security Features
Mail client applications may not be configured securely in their default configurations. Mail clients
should be configured to:
• Disable automatic message preview.
• Disable automatic opening of messages.
• Disable automatic loading of pictures in messages.
• Disable downloading and processing of active content. Examples include ActiveX controls, Java
applets, and JavaScript. This may cause problems for mail applications that are bundled with Web
browsers, because disabling this functionality could affect the Web browser, where such functionality
may be required. In those cases, some selective and careful disabling/enabling of active content may
be needed. In the case of Microsoft Outlook and Internet Explorer, separate Security Zones could be
defined for each, which would allow Internet Explorer to have less restrictive security settings than
Outlook.
• Enable anti-spam and anti-phishing features, if available. These features often have rather permissive
settings by default, so it may be beneficial from a security perspective to set them to a higher level.
Also, users should be educated on reviewing tagged or filtered messages to identify ones that have 
been incorrectly labeled. Some mail clients allow users to configure filtering features such as
creating lists of safe senders and senders to block.
There are additional issues specific to portable mail clients, such as those on cell phones and PDAs. The
use of portable mail clients has increased significantly in recent years. Users should be made aware that
the information that is stored on them is at risk, and that they need to take the necessary precautions in
case their devices are lost or stolen. Beyond the obvious physical security measures, users should also
reconfigure their devices, which are typically configured insecurely by default. Security features to
consider include the following:
• Requiring a password or a PIN to gain access to the device.
• Encrypting locally stored data, including messages and downloaded file attachments.
• Encrypting and/or signing messages, such as supporting S/MIME or OpenPGP and managing digital
certificates.
• Encrypting communications between the mail client and the mail server, such as using SSL-based
encryption to protect POP, IMAP, and SMTP communications.
• Remotely rendering the device useless or deleting its information if it is compromised.
• Changing the Bluetooth discovery PIN number on Bluetooth devices to prevent unauthorized access.
Organizations should also ensure that their security policy supports the protection of portable mail clients,
such as requiring that the devices have anti-virus software enabled on them if available and that wireless
functionality be turned off when not being used. Organizations that do not want certain types of devices
used to access email should specify the restriction in their security policy.
Many organizations configure mobile devices with VPN access to corporate networks or applications that
can connect remotely to servers. As a good security measure, limit access to these applications or remove
them if they are not being used. Also, do not store logins, passwords, or personal information on the
devices. If the device is stolen, an attacker could potentially use network login information with the VPN
to access internal network resources.
8.1.3 Configuring Authentication and Access
Early mail client applications did not require user authentication because mailbox access was restricted by
the local file system and the user owned the mailbox file. As MUAs evolved and provided the
functionality to access mailboxes remotely via POP and IMAP (see Section 2), user authentication
became a requirement. Typically, this was accomplished with users inputting a username and a password
when accessing their mailbox. To be more "user-friendly," mail clients incorporated configuration files
that contained (e.g., "remembered") usernames and passwords with which to access the mail server.
Although this provides ease of use for users, it introduces security weaknesses insofar as a remote or local
attacker having logical or physical access to the mail client host may gain access to the authentication
information and, in turn, the mailbox contents. In addition, if automatic completion of user input is
enabled, a local attacker may be able to use the feature to discover passwords systematically.
Disabling password recall functionality is an effective way to increase mail client security. If the
functionality cannot be disabled, then keeping these configuration files secure is important. Most
operating systems provide file permission and access control features that offer some means of protection.
With hosts that do provide these controls, ensure that the mail client configuration files are restricted for
accessibility by only the file owner. Additionally, ensure that the file is located in a directory controlled 
by the owner. In cases where a host's file permissions and access controls are unavailable, the best
resolution is to remove the user passwords from the configuration files.
Another area to address is the actual communication between the mail client and mail server. As
mentioned in Section 2, all network communication with the default configurations of SMTP, POP, and
IMAP occurs unencrypted. This makes usernames, passwords, and message content subject to
interception and alteration by malicious entities. To increase client to server security, this communication
can be encrypted using SSL/TLS. Most commonly used mail clients support SSL/TLS; it should be used
if it is available. TLS version 1 is preferred for use; at a minimum, SSL version 3 should be used.
The selection of email addresses and user account names also affects authentication. Using account
names in email addresses should be avoided, so that an attacker cannot easily determine a person's
account name from the person's email address. Organizations that allow users to select their own email
account names should put controls in place to ensure that account names and email addresses are distinct
and unrelated. Organizations might also want to place additional restrictions on email addresses, such as
having different naming conventions for certain types of users (e.g., contractors, foreign nationals) to
allow the user type to be easily recognized. Examples of such naming conventions are
firstname.lastname.countrycode@domain.gov for a foreign national's address, and
firstname.lastname.ctr@domain.gov for a contractor's address.
8.1.4 Securing the Client Host's Operating System
Many host operating systems provide a number of configuration settings and other measures for
increasing the security of the mail client either directly or indirectly. The host operating system is a key
component of the overall security of a client host. The following should be done to secure the host
operating system:
• Keep it updated to the most secure patch level.
• Configure it to allow only the appropriate user(s) to access locally stored messages and mail client
configuration files.
• Configure (Windows hosts only) the Windows Script Host (WSH) [Pits01]:
– Remove WSH or allow only the administrator to access
– Change the default action of the following file extensions from execute to edit:
– JS (JavaScript)
– JSE (JavaScript Encoded File)
– VBE (VBScript Encoded File)
– VBS (Visual Basic Script)
– WS (Windows Script File)
– WSC (Windows Script Component)
– WSF (Windows Script File)
– WSH (Windows Script Host Settings File)
• On Windows hosts, configure them to display full file extensions (this ensures that an email
attachment such as iloveyou.txt.vbs is displayed instead of iloveyou.txt).
• Install an anti-virus application and configure it to automatically scan all incoming messages and any
attachments as they are opened. Also, install and use an anti-spyware application if the anti-virus
software does not offer robust anti-spyware capabilities. Section 6.2.1 contains a detailed explanation
of malware scanning at the client, server, and network layers.
• Install a personal firewall to protect the computer from unauthorized communications, unless the
computer is already sufficiently protected by existing network security devices (e.g., network
firewalls).
• Ensure that the operating system enforces the concept of least privilege, because malicious code runs
in the security context on which it was launched (i.e., the user's access level). For example, users
should only read and compose email using accounts without administrator-level privileges.
• Ensure that critical components of the operating system are protected from malicious code.
• Use a file encrypting application to protect the email stored locally on the user's hard drive (this is
especially important for laptop computers and other mobile devices, which are more likely to be
stolen).
• Configure the operating system to automatically lock the current OS session after a fixed period of
inactivity.
8.2 Secure Message Composition
Encryption should be used to securely send email messages containing sensitive information. Two
primary methods for encrypting email are S/MIME and OpenPGP, which were discussed in detail in
Section 3. Both offer similar levels of protection, but their inherent architectures are different. Most mail
clients support S/MIME natively, whereas OpenPGP usually comes in the form of a plug-in. Ultimately,
the choice comes down to which solution meets the requirements of the organization. As a general rule,
unencrypted email should be treated as a postcard – anyone can read and modify.
Securing messages using S/MIME or OpenPGP involves obtaining digital certificates for both the sender
and recipient. A digital certificate has several components, including the name and email address of the
person to whom the certificate was issued, a public key and its expiration date, information about the CA
that issued the certificate (including its digital signature), and the serial number of the certificate. When
the sender has both the sender and receiver's digital certificates, the sender can digitally sign and encrypt
email messages to the recipient. Digitally signing a message is important in three ways:
• Authenticity allows the recipient to be confident that the message is from the sender. 
• Non-repudiation ensures that the sender cannot deny creating the message.
• Integrity ensures that the message has not accidentally or maliciously been altered during
transmission from sender to recipient.
Digital certificates can be obtained from either an internal certificate authority (CA) or a public, third-party CA. Table 3.3 contains a list of third-party CAs.
For a mail client that is configured to send and receive encrypted messages, received messages should be
stored in their encrypted format only if they need to continue to be protected; otherwise, it is preferable to
allow users to choose which messages should be stored encrypted, if any. The mail client may also be
configured to send and receive unencrypted, but authenticated, messages, where integrity is the primary
concern. Under normal circumstances, the mail client should be set to require a password once per email
session. Requiring a password each time a message is opened for reading can take considerable time and
can discourage people from using encryption to protect emails; accordingly, this level of security is
typically used only for the highest-security needs.
8.3 Plug-ins
A number of different plug-ins are available for mail clients. These plug-ins offer additional functionality
beyond that of the basic mail client configuration. Mail encryption, anti-virus, pop-up blocker, and
malware prevention plug-ins are a small subset of the types of plug-ins available. Some provide
advanced filtering capabilities, whereas others provide audible notification of new messages. Regardless
of the type of plug-in, care needs to be taken when installing them. Generally, only install plug-ins from
trusted sources. Be wary of any plug-in that has not been distributed from the manufacturer in a digitally
signed archive. Some plug-ins offering additional functionality may contain spyware that can track the
Web sites a user visits or adware that delivers pop-up advertisements. They can come in the form of a
toolbar that is automatically installed in your Internet browser. Using manufacturers' Web sites to
acquire plug-ins reduces the likelihood of installing a malicious plug-in.
8.4 Accessing Web-Based Mail Systems
From a user standpoint, accessing a mail server via a Web browser can be efficient and convenient.
Unfortunately, a number of security concerns should be carefully considered before implementing Web-based access to mail servers. Many of the concerns are the same as those for standard mail clients. For
example, the default configuration for Web-based access normally sends passwords and data in the clear,
such as those for POP and IMAP. For greater security, organizations should configure the mail server to
accept Web connections only via 128-bit SSL/TLS connections. This setting causes both user
authentication and email content to be encrypted during transmission from the user's Web browser to the
Web server. However, it does not protect the content as it is transmitted from the mail server to the
recipient(s); some form of email encryption, such as S/MIME or OpenPGP, would need to be used if
message confidentiality is required. Unfortunately, most Web-based mail systems do not directly support 
them. One solution is to encrypt the data separately and then paste it into the browser for transmission
(this is easily done with OpenPGP).
Enabling Web-based access often requires a weakening in the overall security posture of the mail server.
Organizations must be aware of the risks and carefully consider whether to implement Web-based access
to their mail server (see Section 6.6).
A serious risk with Web-based mail systems is access from public computers (e.g., college computing lab,
Internet café, public library). In these situations, the browser may be configured to store and recall
usernames and passwords automatically. If it is configured this way, an unauthorized person may use
these credentials to obtain access to the organization's mail server. Another danger is that a public
computer may have a keystroke logger that registers and saves all keystrokes entered by the mail user,
including username and password. Again, this data could be used to access and compromise the
organization's mail server. Web browsers also temporarily cache a user's credentials for a fixed period
after the user logs in. If the user fails to empty the browser cache and close the browser after completing
access to the mail server, it is possible for an unauthorized person to employ the cached credentials to
access the organization's mail server. The use of SSL/TLS does not generally protect against these
dangers. Web browsers also cache downloaded files and create temporary files that may contain email
messages, email attachments, and other information from Web-based mail access. If the Web browser
does not clean the cache and temporary files after the session ends, other users of the computer could
potentially access these files.
The security of Web-based mail is based in large part on the expertise of users. For example, some Web-based mail applications ask users if they are using public or private computers; users should select the
public option to further protect their email information. Thus, users should be made aware of what they
should do before being granted access to Web-based mail. Organizations should also consider creating a
"Rules of Behavior" agreement that each user signs, in which he or she acknowledges responsibility and
accountability for the appropriate use of Web-based mail.
8.5 Checklist for Securing Mail Clients
9. Administering the Mail Server
After initially deploying a mail server, administrators need to maintain its security continuously. This
section provides general recommendations for securely administering mail servers. Vital activities
include handling and analyzing log files; performing regular mail server backups; recovering from mail
server compromises; testing the mail server's security regularly; and performing remote administration
securely.
9.1 Logging
Logging is a cornerstone of a sound security posture. Capturing the correct data in the logs and then
monitoring those logs closely is vital. Network and system logs are important, especially system logs in
the case of S/MIME or OpenPGP (see Section 3) enabled mail servers, where network monitoring is less
effective. Mail server software can provide additional log data relevant to mail-specific events.
Reviewing logs is mundane and reactive, and many mail server administrators devote their time to
performing duties that they may consider more important or urgent. However, log files are often the only
record of suspicious behavior. Enabling the mechanisms to log information allows the logs to be used to
detect failed and successful intrusion attempts and to initiate alert notifications when further investigation
is needed. Procedures and tools need to be in place to process and analyze the log files and to review alert
notifications.
Mail server logs provide:
• Alerts to suspicious activities that require further investigation
• Tracking of an attacker's activities
• Assistance in the recovery of the system
• Assistance in post-event investigation
• Required information for legal proceedings.
The selection and implementation of specific mail server software determine which set of detailed
instructions presented below the mail administrator should follow to establish logging configurations.
Some of the guidance contained in the steps below may not be fully applicable to all manufacturers' mail
server software products.
9.1.1 Recommended Generic Logging Configuration
Although the logging capabilities of a mail server vary for each product, the following generic
configuration is recommended. Set logging on the mail server to the standard level used within the
organization. Once the overall logging detail level is set, ensure the following events are logged (if
supported by the mail server software):
• Local host related logging
– IP stack setup errors 
– Resolver configuration problems (e.g., DNS, NIS)
– Mail server configuration errors (e.g., mismatch with DNS: local configuration error, out of date
alias database)
– Lack of system resources (disk space, memory, CPU)
– Alias database rebuilds
• Connection-related logging
– Failed logins, and also successful logins if adequate space is available
– Security problems (e.g., spamming)
– Lost communications (network problems)
– Protocol failures
– Connection timeouts
– Connection rejections
– Use of VRFY and EXPN commands
• Message-related logging
– Send on behalf of
– Send as
– Malformed addresses
– Message collection statistics
– Creation of error messages
– Delivery failures (permanent errors)
– Messages being deferred (transient errors).
Ensuring that sufficient log capacity is available is a concern, since logs often take considerably more
space than administrators initially estimate, especially when logging is set to a highly detailed level.
Administrators should closely monitor the size of the log files when they implement different logging
settings to ensure that the log files do not fill up the allocated storage. Due to the size of the log files,
removing and archiving the logs more frequently or reducing the logging level of detail may be necessary.
Some mail server programs provide a capability to enforce or disable the checking of specified access
controls during program startup. This level of control may be helpful, for example, to avoid inadvertent
alteration of log files because of errors in file access administration. Mail server administrators should
determine the circumstances under which they may wish to enable such checks (assuming the mail server
software supports this feature).
9.1.2 Log File Review and Retention
Reviewing log files is a tedious and time-consuming task which informs administrators of events that
have already occurred. Accordingly, they are often useful for corroborating other evidence, such as a
CPU utilization spike or anomalous network traffic reported by an IPS. When a log is used to corroborate
other evidence, a focused review is in order. For example, if an IPS reported an inbound connection to
the mail server at 8:17 a.m. that attempted to use the VRFY command, then a review of the logs generated
just before 8:17 a.m. is appropriate. Mail server logs should also be reviewed for indications of attacks or
spamming. The frequency of the reviews depends on the following factors:
• Amount of traffic the server receives
• General threat level (certain sites receive many more attacks than other sites and thus should review
their logs more frequently)
• Specific threats (at certain times specific threats arise that may require more frequent log file analysis)
• Vulnerability of the mail server
• Value of data and services provided by the mail server.
Reviews should take place regularly (e.g., daily) and when a suspicious activity has been noted or a threat
warning has been issued. Obviously, the task could quickly become burdensome to a mail administrator.
To reduce this burden, automated log analysis tools have been developed (see Section 9.1.3).
In addition, a long-term and more in-depth analysis of the logs is needed. Because a typical mail server
attack can involve hundreds of unique requests, an attacker may attempt to disguise a mail attack by
increasing the interval between requests. In this case, reviewing a single day's or week's logs may not
show recognizable trends. However, when trends are analyzed over a week, month, or quarter, multiple
attacks from the same host or subnet can be more easily recognized.
Log files should be protected to ensure that if an attacker does compromise a mail server, the log files
cannot be altered to cover the attack. Although encryption can be useful in protecting log files, the best
solution is to store log files on a host separate from the mail server. This is often called a centralized
logging server. Centralized logging is often performed using syslog, which is a standard logging
protocol. Alternately, some organizations use security information and event management (SIEM)
software that uses centralized servers to perform log analysis, database servers to store logs, and agents
installed on each host to parse particular types of logs, such as mail server logs, and transfer their data to
the centralized servers.
Log files should be backed up and archived regularly. Archiving log files for a period of time is
important for several reasons, including supporting certain legal actions and troubleshooting problems
with the mail server. The retention period for archived log files depends on a number of factors,
including:
• Legal requirements
• Organizational requirements 
• Size of logs (which is directly related to the traffic of the site and the number of details logged)
• Value of mail server data and services
• Threat level.
9.1.3 Automated Log File Analysis Tools
Most mail servers receive significant amounts of traffic, and the log files quickly become voluminous.
Automated log analysis tools should be installed to ease the burden on the mail server administrator.
These tools analyze the entries in the mail server log files and identify suspicious and unusual activity.
As mentioned in Section 9.1.2, some organizations use SIEM software for centralized logging, which can
also perform automated log file analysis.
Many commercial and public domain tools are available to support regular analysis. The automated log
analyzer should forward any suspicious events to the responsible mail administrator or security incident
response team as soon as possible for follow-up investigation. Some organizations may wish to use two
or more log analyzers to reduce the risk of missing an attack or other significant events in the log files.
[Kent06]
9.2 Backing Up Mail Servers
One of the most important functions of a mail server administrator is to maintain the integrity of the data
on the mail server. This is important because mail servers are often one of the most exposed and vital
servers on an organization's network. The mail administrator needs to perform backups of the mail server
on a regular basis for several reasons. For example, a mail server could fail as a result of a malicious or
unintentional act or a hardware or software failure. In addition, Federal agencies and many other
organizations are governed by regulations on the backup and archiving of mail server data. Mail server
data should also be backed up on a regular basis for legal and financial reasons.
All organizations need to create a mail server backup policy. Three main factors influence the contents of
this policy:
• Legal requirements
– Applicable laws and regulations (Federal, state, and international)
– Litigation requirements
• Mission requirements
– Contractual
– Accepted practices
– Criticality of data to organization
• Organizational guidelines and policies.
Although each organization's mail server backup policy will be different to reflect its particular
environment, it should address the following issues:
• The purpose of the mail server backup policy
• The parties affected by the mail server backup policy
• The mail servers covered by the backup policy
• The definitions of key terms, especially legal and technical
• The detailed requirements from the legal, business, and organization's perspective
• The required frequency of backups
• The procedures for ensuring that data is properly retained and protected
• The procedures for ensuring that data is properly destroyed or archived when no longer required
• The procedures for preserving information for Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests, legal
investigations, and other such requests
• The responsibilities of those involved in data retention, protection, and destruction activities
• The retention period for each type of information logged
• The specific duties of the central/organizational data backup team, if one exists.
Three primary types of backups exist: full, incremental, and differential. Full backups include the
operating system, applications, and data stored on the mail server (i.e., an image of every piece of data
stored on the mail server hard drives). The advantage of a full backup is that it is easy to restore the entire
mail server back to the state (e.g., configuration, patch level, data) it was in when the backup was
performed. The disadvantage of full backups is that they take considerable time and resources to perform.
Incremental backups reduce the impact by backing up only data that has changed since the previous
backup (either full or incremental).
Differential backups reduce the number of backup sets that must be accessed to restore a configuration by
backing up all changed data since the last full backup. However, as time lapses from the last full backup,
each differential backup becomes increasingly larger, taking more processing time and storage than an
incremental backup would. Generally, full backups are performed less frequently (weekly to monthly or
when a significant change occurs), and incremental or differential backups are performed more frequently
(daily to weekly). Several factors determine the frequency of backups:
• Volatility of information on and configuring of the mail server
• Amount of data to be backed up
• Backup device and media available
• Time available for dumping backup data
• Criticality of data 
• Threat level faced by the mail server
• Effort required to data reconstruction without data backup
• Other data backup or redundancy features of the mail server (e.g., Redundant Array of Inexpensive
Disks [RAID]).
When archiving or backing up email data, organizations should generally conform to the following
guidelines:
• Employ write-once, read-many media (to prevent the alteration or accidental erasure of archived
information)
• Contain a verification capability to ensure that data is being correctly backed up or archived
• Include the capability to serialize and time-date the information stored
• Provide for easy retrieval of indexes and records preserved on the backup media
• Maintain at least two copies in two geographically distinct locations
• Accurately organize and index all information maintained on both original and duplicate storage
media.
9.3 Recovering from a Security Compromise
Most organizations eventually face a successful compromise of one or more hosts on their network. The
first step in recovering from a compromise is to create and document the required policies and procedures
for responding to successful intrusions before an intrusion. The response procedures should outline the
actions that are required to respond to a successful compromise of the mail server and the appropriate
sequence of these actions (sequence can be critically important). Most organizations already have a
dedicated incident response team in place which should be contacted immediately when there is suspicion
or confirmation of a compromise. In addition, the organization may wish to ensure that some of its staff
are knowledgeable in the fields of computer and network forensics.
A mail server administrator should follow the organization's policies and procedures for incident
handling, and the incident response team should be contacted for guidance before taking any action after a
suspected or confirmed security compromise. Examples of steps commonly performed after discovering
a successful compromise are as follows:
• Report the incident to the organization's computer incident response capability
• Isolate the compromised systems or take other steps to contain the attack so that additional
information can be collected
• Consult, as appropriate, with management, legal counsel, and law enforcement expeditiously
• Investigate similar hosts to determine if the attacker also has compromised other systems
• Analyze the intrusion, including:
– Capture the current state of the server starting with the most ephemeral data first (e.g., current
network connections, memory dump, files time stamps, logged in users, etc.)
– Modifications made to the system's software and configuration
– Modifications made to the data
– Tools or data left behind by attacker
– System logs, intrusion detection, and firewall log files
• Restore the system
– One of the following two options:
– Install clean version of operating system
– Restore from backups (this option can be more risky, as the backups may have been made
after the compromise, and restoring from a compromised backup may still allow the attacker
access to the system)
– Disable unnecessary services
– Apply all patches
– Change all passwords (even on uncompromised hosts as required)
– Reconfigure network security elements (firewall, router, IPS) to provide additional protection and
notification
• Test system to ensure security
• Reconnect system to network
• Monitor system and network for signs that the attacker is attempting to access the system or network
again
• Document lessons learned.
System administrators should decide whether to reinstall the operating system of a compromised system
or restore it from a backup based on organization policy and procedures. Factors that are often considered
include the following:
• Level of access that the attacker gained (e.g., root, user, guest, system)
• Type of attacker (internal or external) 
• Purpose of the compromise (e.g., email spoofing, illegal software repository, platform for other
attacks)
• Method used for the system compromise
• Actions of the attacker during and after the compromise (e.g., log files, intrusion detection reports)
• Duration of the compromise
• Extent of the compromise on the network (e.g., the number of hosts compromised)
• Results of consultation with management and legal counsel.
The lower the level of access gained by the attacker and the more the mail server administrator
understands about the attacker's actions, the less risk there is in restoring from a backup and patching the
vulnerability. For incidents in which there is less known about the attacker's actions and/or in which the
attacker gains high-level access, it is recommended that the operating system and applications be
reinstalled from the manufacturer's original distribution media and that the mail server data be restored
from a known good backup.
If legal action is pursued, system administrators need to be aware of the guidelines for handling a host
after a compromise. Consult legal counsel and relevant law enforcement authorities as appropriate.
9.4 Security Testing Mail Servers
Periodic security testing of public mail servers is critical. Without periodic testing, there is no
assurance that current protective measures are working or that the security patch just applied by the mail
server administrator is functioning as advertised. Although a variety of security testing techniques exists,
vulnerability scanning is the most common. Vulnerability scanning assists a mail server administrator in
identifying vulnerabilities and verifying whether the existing security measures are effective. Penetration
testing is also used, but less frequently and usually only as part of an overall penetration test of the
organization's network.
9.4.1 Vulnerability Scanning
Vulnerability scanners are automated tools that are used to identify vulnerabilities and misconfiguration
of hosts. Many vulnerability scanners also provide information about mitigating discovered
vulnerabilities.
Vulnerability scanners attempt to identify vulnerabilities in the hosts scanned. Vulnerability scanners can
help identify out-of-date software versions, missing patches or system upgrades, and validate compliance
with or deviations from the organization's security policy. To accomplish this effort, vulnerability
scanners identify operating systems and major software applications running on hosts and match them
with known vulnerabilities. Vulnerability scanners employ large databases of vulnerabilities to identify
vulnerabilities associated with commonly used operating systems and applications. 
However, vulnerability scanners have some significant weaknesses. Generally, they identify only surface
vulnerabilities and are unable to address the overall risk level of a scanned mail server. Although the scan
process itself is highly automated, vulnerability scanners can have a high false positive error rate
(reporting vulnerabilities when none exist). This means an individual with expertise in mail server
security and administration must interpret the results. Furthermore, vulnerability scanners cannot
generally identify vulnerabilities in custom code or applications.
Vulnerability scanners rely on periodic updating of the vulnerability database to recognize the latest
vulnerabilities. Before running any scanner, mail server administrators should install the latest updates to
its vulnerability database. Some vulnerability scanner databases are updated more regularly than others
(the frequency of updates should be a major consideration when choosing a vulnerability scanner).
Vulnerability scanners are often better at detecting well-known vulnerabilities rather than more esoteric
ones because it is impossible for any one scanning product to incorporate all known vulnerabilities in a
timely manner. In addition, manufacturers want to keep the speed of their scanners high (more
vulnerabilities detected requires more tests, which slows the overall scanning process). Therefore,
vulnerability scanners may be of little use to mail server administrators operating less popular mail
servers, operating systems, or custom-coded applications.
Vulnerability scanners provide the following capabilities:
• Identifying active hosts on the network
• Identifying active services (ports) on hosts and which of these are vulnerable
• Identifying applications and banner grabbing
• Identifying operating systems
• Identifying vulnerabilities associated with discovered operating systems and applications
• Testing compliance with host application usage/security policies.
Organizations should conduct vulnerability scanning to validate that operating systems and mail server
applications are up to date on security patches and software versions. Vulnerability scanning is a labor-intensive activity that requires a high degree of human involvement to interpret the results. It may also be
disruptive to operations by taking up network bandwidth, slowing network response times and potentially
impacting the availability of the scanned server or its applications. However, vulnerability scanning is
extremely important for ensuring that vulnerabilities are mitigated as soon as possible, before they are
discovered and exploited by adversaries. Vulnerability scanning should be conducted on a weekly to
monthly basis. Many organizations also run a vulnerability scan whenever a new vulnerability database is
released for the organization's scanner application. Vulnerability scanning results should be documented
and discovered deficiencies corrected.
Organizations should also consider running more than one vulnerability scanner. As previously
discussed, no scanner is able to detect all known vulnerabilities; however, using two scanners generally
increases the number of vulnerabilities detected. A common practice is to use one commercial and one
freeware scanner. Network- and host-based vulnerability scanners are available for free or for a fee.
9.4.2 Penetration Testing
"Penetration testing is security testing in which evaluators attempt to circumvent the security features of a
system based on their understanding of the system design and implementation" [NISS99]. The purpose 
of penetration testing is to exercise system protections (particularly human response to attack indications)
by using common tools and techniques developed by attackers. This testing is highly recommended for
complex or critical systems.
Penetration testing can be an invaluable technique for any organization's information security program.
However, it is a very labor-intensive activity and requires great expertise to minimize the risk to targeted
systems. At a minimum, it may slow the organization's network response time because of network
mapping and vulnerability scanning. Furthermore, the possibility exists that systems may be damaged or
rendered inoperable in the course of penetration testing. Although this risk is mitigated by the use of
experienced penetration testers, it can never be fully eliminated.
Penetration testing does offer the following benefits [Wack02b]:
• Tests the network using the same methodologies and tools employed by attackers
• Verifies whether vulnerabilities exist
• Goes beyond surface vulnerabilities and demonstrates how these vulnerabilities can be exploited
iteratively to gain greater access
• Demonstrates that vulnerabilities are not purely theoretical
• Provides the "realism" necessary to address security issues
• Allows for testing of procedures and the susceptibility of the human element to social engineering.
9.5 Remotely Administering a Mail Server
It is strongly recommended that remote administration of a mail server be allowed only after careful
consideration of the risks.66 The most secure configuration is to disallow any remote administration.
However, that may not be viable for all organizations. The risk of enabling remote administration varies
considerably depending on the location of the mail server on the network (see Section 7.1). For a mail
server that is located behind a firewall, remote administration can be implemented relatively securely
from the internal network, but not without added risk. Remote administration should generally not be
allowed from a host located outside the organization's network unless performed from an organization-controlled computer through the organization's remote access solution, such as a virtual private network.
If an organization determines that it is necessary to remotely administer a mail server, following these
steps should ensure that it is implemented in as secure a manner as possible:
• Use a strong authentication mechanism (e.g., public/private key pair, two factor authentication).
• Restrict which hosts can be used to remotely administer the mail server:
– Restrict by authorized users
– Restrict by IP address (not hostname); for example, access could be restricted to some or all hosts
on the internal network, or hosts using the organization's enterprise remote access solution 
• Use secure protocols that can provide encryption for both passwords and data, such as secure shell
[SSH] or Secure HTTP [HTTPS], and not less secure protocols (e.g., Telnet, FTP, NFS, HTTP)
unless absolutely required and tunneled over an encrypted protocol such SSH, SSL or IPsec.
• Enforce the concept of least privilege on remote administration (e.g., attempt to minimize the access
rights for the remote administration accounts).
• Do not allow remote administration from the Internet through the firewall unless accomplished via
strong mechanisms such as VPNs.
• Change any default accounts or passwords from the remote administration utility or application.
• Do not mount any file shares on the internal network from the mail server or vice versa. 
9.6 Checklist for Administering the Mail Server 