Abstract
This supplement to NIST Special Publication 800-63B, Digital Identity Guidelines: Authentication
and Lifecycle Management, provides agencies with additional guidance on the use of
authenticators that may be synced between devices. 
1. Introduction
The NIST Digital Identity Guidelines [1] provide the process and technical requirements for
digital identity, including identity proofing, authentication, and federation. NIST Special
Publication (SP) 800-63B (Volume B associated with SP 800-63-3) specifically addresses the
requirements for authentication and life cycle management to include specific requirements for
each type of acceptable authenticator.[2] Revision 3 is the most recent major revision to the
guidelines and was published in June of 2017. While an update to the entire series is ongoing
and will culminate in Revision 4, the pace of technology is more rapid than NIST's typical
document development and review processes, warranting this supplemental update.
One such authenticator type addressed in SP 800-63B is a multi-factor cryptographic
authenticator. Typically, this authentication type protects a cryptographic key in hardware or
software that requires activation through a second authentication factor, either a memorized
secret or a biometric characteristic. Protecting the private key from unauthorized exposure is
fundamental to the security model of a multi-factor cryptographic authenticator. This
traditionally includes ensuring that private keys are not exportable or cloneable. However, this
paradigm is starting to change. Notably, a new series of authentication protocols and
specifications has led to the rapid adoption of syncable authenticators (commonly referred to
as "passkeys"), which allow users to synchronize (i.e., duplicate) a private key between
different devices.
When SP 800-63-3 was published in 2017, two key supporting specifications — Fast Identity
Online (FIDO) Client to Authenticator Protocol (CTAP) [3] and W3C's Web Authentication [4]
(known as FIDO2 when used together) — did not exist, nor did a robust, well-understood
ecosystem of implementations. Based on the type of cryptographic authenticators available at
the time, the 2017 guidelines restricted the ability of multi-factor cryptographic authenticators
to "clone" a key to other devices. However, the ecosystem has accelerated rapidly in the last
two years, and most major platform providers now implement scaled, syncable authentication
capabilities. These authenticators offer many benefits, including support for phishing
resistance, the ability to be bound to specific relying parties, elimination of the need to
transmit passwords, simplified authenticator recovery, and the use of a wide variety of device-native biometrics and PINs as a second factor to accompany the stored private key. They also
offer convenience that fits an increasingly multi-device and multi-platform world.
As with any new technology, the promise of innovation is accompanied by new threats and
challenges that must be explored and understood. As such, this supplement provides an
overview of the considerations that federal agencies should weigh, including contemporary
threats, as they determine whether and how to implement syncable authenticators. 
2. Purpose
The purpose of this document is to adapt current NIST guidelines to reflect the changing
authentication and credential marketplace. This supplement describes how syncable
authenticators mitigate threats in a manner consistent with the established Authentication
Assurance Levels in SP 800-63-3 and provides federal agencies with an understanding of
syncable authenticator capabilities that can be leveraged to achieve SP 800-63-3 Authentication
Assurance Level 2 (AAL2). It also provides updates to the use of software cryptographic
authenticators discussed in Sec. 5.1.8 of SP 800-63B [2], specifically the ability of said
authenticators to support AAL2 authentication requirements even when a key has been
duplicated (e.g., "cloned" or "synced") to another device. Finally, this document provides some
considerations for implementation based on two use case types: public-facing applications (i.e.,
federal information systems that interact with public identities, as described in OMB
Memorandum M-19-17) and federal enterprise applications (i.e., federal information systems
that primarily interact with federal enterprise identities, as described in OMB Memorandum M19-17). This document supplements existing guidance found in SP 800-63-3, and it will be
superseded by the final version of SP 800-63B-4. 
3. Syncable Authenticators Achieve AAL2
NIST's Authenticator Assurance Levels are primarily structured around an authenticator's ability
to protect against certain threats to the authentication process. At AAL2, the intent is to
provide a high degree of confidence that a user possesses two single-factor authenticators, or a
multi-factor authenticator bound to the user's account. Table 1 illustrates the required threat
mitigations from SP 800-63-3 [1] and how a properly configured syncable authenticator
protects against these threats. 
Section 5 discusses additional considerations around the configuration of syncable
authenticators.
To meet AAL2 requirements, the syncable authenticator SHALL make use of a local
authentication event to unlock the locally stored key or SHALL be used with another
authenticator (e.g., a user-selected password) if no local authentication mechanism is available.
In the FIDO2 Web Authentication (WebAuthn) context, this will be indicated by the value of the
User Verification flag available in the authenticator data of the W3C Web Authentication
specifications. See Sec. 5 for more details on FIDO2 WebAuthn Authenticator data flags.
4. Updates on the Allowance of Cloning Authentication Keys
SP 800-63B, Section 5.1.8.1, Multi-Factor Cryptographic Software Authenticators, restricts the
ability of an authenticator to "clone" a cryptographic authentication key from one device to
another. Specifically, it states:
Multi-factor cryptographic software authenticators SHOULD discourage
and SHALL NOT facilitate the cloning of the secret key onto multiple
devices.
Syncable authenticators explicitly facilitate key cloning to provide the user with access to
previously enrolled authenticators across devices and different platform providers. This is an
experience that can be both secure and convenient if done correctly — a reality acknowledged
by NIST's removal of this restriction from the initial public draft (ipd) of SP 800-63B-4.
Effective at the time of the publication of this document, the above statement in section 5.1.8.1
is superseded by this supplement and syncable authenticators that are deployed under the
requirements set forth in this supplement SHALL be considered sufficient to protect against
threats contemplated under AAL2.
General requirements for all uses of syncable authenticators:
• All keys SHALL be generated using approved cryptography.
• Private keys that are cloned or exported from a device SHALL only be stored in an
encrypted form.
• All authentication transactions SHALL perform private-key operations on the local
device using cryptographic keys that were generated on-device or recovered from the
sync fabric (e.g., in cloud storage).
• Private keys stored in cloud-based accounts SHALL be protected by access control
mechanisms such that only the authenticated user can access their private keys in the
sync fabric.
• User access to private keys in the sync fabric SHALL be protected by AAL2 equivalent
MFA to preserve the integrity of the authentication protocols using the synced keys.
• These general requirements and any other agency-specific requirements for the use of
syncable authenticators SHALL be documented and communicated, including on publicfacing websites and digital service policies, where applicable.
Additional requirements for federal enterprise use of syncable authenticators:
• Federal enterprise private keys (i.e., federal keys) SHALL be stored in sync fabrics that
have achieved FISMA Moderate protections or comparable.
• Devices (e.g., mobile phones, laptops, tablets) that generate, store, and sync
authenticators containing federal enterprise private keys SHALL be protected by mobile
device management software or other device configuration controls that prevent the
syncing or sharing of keys to unauthorized devices or sync fabrics.
• Access to the sync fabric SHALL be controlled by agency-managed accounts (e.g., a
central identity and access management solution or platform-based managed account)
to maintain enterprise control over the life cycle of the private key.
• Authenticators that generate private keys SHOULD support attestation features that can
be used to verify the capabilities and source of the authenticator (e.g., enterprise
attestation).
These controls specifically support syncing and should be considered additive to the existing
multi-factor software cryptographic authenticator requirements and AAL2 requirements,
including FIPS 140 validation.
5. Implementation Considerations and Requirements
Syncable authenticators are built upon W3C's WebAuthn specification, which provides a
common data structure, a challenge-response cryptographic protocol, and an API for leveraging
public-key credentials. The specification is flexible and adaptive, meaning that not all
deployments of WebAuthn credentials will meet the requirements of federal agencies for
implementation.
The specification has a series of "flags" that the relying party (RP) application can request from
the authenticator to provide additional context for the authentication event and determine
whether it meets the RP's access policies. This section describes certain flags in the WebAuthn
specification that federal agencies acting as RPs should understand and interrogate when
building their syncable authenticator implementations to align with NIST AAL2 threat
mitigations. 
In addition to the flags indicated in Table 2, agencies may wish to gain greater information on
the origins and capabilities of the syncable authenticators that they choose to implement and
accept. Within the context of FIDO2 WebAuthn, some authenticators support attestation
features that can be used to determine the capabilities and manufacturer of a specific
authenticator. For enterprise use cases, agencies SHOULD implement attestation capabilities
based on the functionality offered by their platform providers. Preferably, this would take the
form of an enterprise attestation where the RP requests uniquely identifying information about
the authenticator.
Attestations SHOULD NOT be used for broad public-facing applications. Such a requirement
(i.e., one that blocks some public users' syncable authenticators if they do not support
attestation) may divert users to less secure authentication options that are vulnerable to
phishing, such as Short Message Service (SMS) one-time password (OTP).
Even if the RP requests flag and attestation data, the authenticator may not return all of the
requested information, or it may return information that is inconsistent with the expected
response mandated for access to a resource. Therefore, it is critically important that agencies
evaluate the use cases for which they are using syncable authenticators and determine the
appropriate access policy decisions they intend to make based on the returned information.
6. Syncable Authenticator Threats and Challenges
Syncable authenticators present some distinct threats and challenges that agencies should
evaluate before implementation or deployment. Table 3 outlines these risks and suggested
mitigations. 
7. Sharing
Cybersecurity guidelines have historically cautioned against sharing authenticators between
users, expecting that different users would maintain their own unique authenticators. Despite
this guidance, authenticator and password sharing occurs within some user groups and
applications to allow individuals to share access to a digital account.
As indicated in Table 3, some syncable authenticator implementations have embraced this user
behavior and have established methods for sharing authentication keys between different
users. Further, some implementations actively encourage the sharing of syncable
authenticators as a convenient and more secure alternative to password-sharing for common
services.
For enterprise use cases, concerns over sharing keys can be effectively mitigated using device
management techniques that limit the ability for keys to be moved off approved devices or sync
fabrics. However, similar mitigations are not currently available for public-facing use cases,
leaving relying parties dependent on the sharing models adopted by syncable authenticator
providers. Owners of public-facing applications should be aware of risks associated with shared
authenticators. When interacting with the public, agencies have limited visibility into which
specific authenticators are being employed by their users and should assume that all syncable
authenticators may be subject to sharing. While many sharing models have substantial controls
that minimize risks (e.g., requiring close proximity between devices to allow sharing), other
implementations are less restrictive.
The risk of sharing posed by this new class of authenticators is not unique. In fact, it applies to
all AAL2 authenticator types, some of which are weaker than syncable authenticators. Any
authenticator at AAL2 can be shared by a user who is determined to share it. Users can actively
share passwords, OTPs, out-of-band authenticators, and even push authentication events or
allow a designee (whether formal or not) to authenticate on behalf of an end user.
Agencies determine which authenticators they will accept for their applications based on the
specific risks, threats, and usability considerations they face. Syncable authenticators may be
offered as a new option for applications seeking to implement up to AAL2, and, like any
authenticator, the trade-offs of this technology should be well balanced based on their
expected outcomes for security, privacy, equity, and usability.
8. Conclusion
Syncable authenticators represent a substantive technological shift in the authentication
landscape, particularly in the use of multi-factor cryptographic authenticators. Their
proliferation will result in an inevitable evaluation of the trade-offs associated with allowing
cryptographic keys to be replicated and stored in cloud infrastructure. While this presents
distinct risks (e.g., loss of enterprise control over authentication keys), it also provides a
pathway to convenient, phishing-resistant authenticators that eliminate a primary threat vector
for the public and enterprises. Syncable authenticators will not be appropriate for all use cases.
However, when deployed in a manner that is consistent with the guidelines contained in this
supplement, they can achieve alignment with AAL2 risk mitigations and promote the adoption
of phishing-resistant authentication more broadly.
This document is a companion to the existing Digital Identity Guidelines [1], which provide
agencies with information that will allow them to make informed risk-based decisions and —
where appropriate — integrate the latest in industry innovation. 
