Abstract
This publication provides guidance for federal agencies and organizations to develop and
manage a life cycle approach to building a Cybersecurity and Privacy Learning Program (CPLP).
The approach is intended to address the needs of large and small organizations as well as those
building an entirely new program. The information leverages broadly accepted standards,
regulations, legislation, and best practices. The recommendations are customizable and may be
implemented as part of an organization-wide process that manages awareness, training, and
education programs for a diverse set of federal employee audiences. The program should
encourage behavior change as part of risk management and lead to developing a privacy and
security culture in the organization. The guidance also includes suggested metrics and
evaluation methods to regularly improve and update the program as needs evolve. 
Executive Summary
Ensuring that a federal organization's workforce is aware of and prepared to respond
appropriately and effectively to cybersecurity and privacy risks is an important effort that
requires a strategic approach based on thoughtful planning, resource considerations, and
leadership-driven decision-making. This long-awaited update to the 2003 NIST Special
Publication (SP) 800-50, Building an Information Technology Security Awareness and Training
Program, provides guidance to create and manage a program that includes cybersecurity and
privacy awareness campaigns, role-based training, and other workforce education programs.
These programs combine to create an overall Cybersecurity and Privacy Learning Program
(CPLP) that is part of a larger organizational effort to reduce cybersecurity and privacy risks. The
resulting CPLP supports federal requirements and incorporates industry-recognized best
practices for risk management.
In addition to meeting statutory responsibilities under the Federal Information Security
Management Act (FISMA) [2], this Special Publication supports the National Defense
Authorization Act of 2021 (NDAA) [1] to "publish standards and guidelines for improving
cybersecurity awareness of employees and contractors of Federal agencies."
Including privacy
as a foundational element in the CPLP reflects the guidance found in the 2016 update to the
Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-130:
…it also emphasizes the role of both privacy and security in the federal
information life cycle. Importantly, the inclusion of privacy represents a
shift from viewing security and privacy requirements as merely
compliance exercises to understanding security and privacy as crucial
and related elements of a comprehensive, strategic, and continuous
risk-based program at federal agencies. [3]
Additionally, this update includes elements previously found in SP 800-16, Information
Technology Security Training Requirements: A Role- and Performance-Based Model [4], which
identified federal agency and organizational work roles that required specialized role-based
training for cybersecurity tasks and skills. The relevant content from SP 800-16 has been
incorporated into this publication or has been included in SP 800-181r1 [5]. As a result, SP 800-
16 will be withdrawn upon the release of this publication.
Everyone in an organization plays a role in the success of an effective cybersecurity and privacy
program. For those whose information technology, cybersecurity, or cybersecurity-related job
responsibilities require additional or specific training, the NICE Workforce Framework for 
Cybersecurity (NICE Framework)[5] identifies the specific knowledge and skills necessary to
perform tasks associated with work roles in these areas. Users of this publication will find guidance on the steps necessary to:
• Build an effective CPLP for all federal organizational personnel, including employees and
contractors, that leads to improved norms and behaviors that reduce cybersecurity and
privacy risks to the organization while creating a privacy and security culture
• Identify personnel who require advanced training
• Create a methodology for evaluating the program
• Engage in ongoing improvement to the program
Throughout each section, there are recommendations to enable a program to continually
evolve and improve, thereby minimizing privacy and security risks to the organization.
This document identifies the phases in the management of a CPLP and is organized as follows:
• Section 1: Introduction
• Section 2: CPLP Plan and Strategy
• Section 3: CPLP Analysis and Design
• Section 4: CPLP Development and Implementation
• Section 5: CPLP Assessment and Improvement 
1. Introduction
Reducing and managing cybersecurity and privacy risks require continuous attention from
everyone in an organization. A key component of organizational cybersecurity and privacy plans
is a learning program, which helps to build an understanding of risks and explain everyone's
role in identifying, responding to, and managing those risks. While learning programs vary in
each federal organization, there are fundamental shared elements that can be utilized to create
a Cybersecurity and Privacy Learning Program (CPLP) strategy and establish support for
implementation, evaluation, and reporting activities. The CPLP effort sits within a larger federal
organizational program to address risks, including efforts to reduce risks from physical privacy
and security threats, insider threats, and other related human risk management concerns. Such
efforts are outside of the scope of this document.
For ease of use, the remainder of this document will use the term "CPLP" to refer to all
elements of cybersecurity and privacy awareness, training, and educational activities to include
other programs with titles such as awareness training, practical exercises (e.g., tabletop
exercises, role-playing simulations, cyber ranges, or phishing campaigns), topic-based training,
role-based training, and educational programs. It is not necessary for organizations to rename
their programs as CPLP; this term is applied generically.
The previous version of SP 800-50 defined awareness, training, and education as separate
elements in a learning continuum. Research efforts [6][7] conducted with Federal Government
training managers have shown that these terms have different meanings and can lead to
confusion when describing the broader purpose of building a CPLP. While some managers may
refer to programs as "awareness and training" or "awareness training," the terms are applied
inconsistently across organizations. Regardless of what an organization calls its program, the
overarching goal of a CPLP is to provide opportunities for learning at all levels or stages of one's
career. It is about creating programs where learning can take place.
This Special Publication also uses the term "learner" to describe individuals in any of the
learning program audience segments. The term "learner" can be found in SP 800-181r1 [5],
where it refers to an individual who is acquiring specialized knowledge or developing a skill.
This definition is useful here since it describes all participants in a "learning program." This
document will refer to the program as a CPLP or CPLPs, as some organizations may require
multiple programs to fulfill the learning requirements of the entire workforce.
1.1. Purpose
This document provides guidelines for building and maintaining comprehensive CPLPs for
federal organizations and includes awareness activities and campaigns, awareness training,
practical exercises, topic-based training, role-based training, and educational programs. The
document includes guidance on how an organization can create a strategic program plan and
ensure that there are appropriate resources to meet the organization's learning goals. 
This publication is intended to serve a diverse audience, including:
• Workforce and learning professionals
o Individuals associated with designing, developing, implementing, assessing,
operating, managing, and improving CPLPs for federal agencies and
organizations
o Individuals responsible for overseeing federal human resources, talent
management, contractors, and training programs
o Individuals responsible for federal CPLPs, learning professionals, and managers,
such as Chief Learning Officers (CLOs) and curriculum developers
• Leadership and management
o Individuals responsible for meeting staff learning needs, prioritizing the use of
learning resources, identifying learning gaps, and evaluating learning
effectiveness within the workspace
o Individuals with information system oversight or governance responsibilities,
such as senior leaders, risk executives, authorizing officials, Chief Information
Officers (CIOs), Chief Information Security Officers (CISOs), Data Management
Officers (DMOs), and Chief Privacy Officers (CPOs)
o Individuals with cybersecurity and privacy management responsibilities (e.g.,
managing programs and projects and ensuring that staff members have the
appropriate knowledge and skills to perform their work roles), including program
and project managers, cybersecurity managers, and security operation managers
• Cybersecurity and privacy specialists
o Workforce members who are responsible for assisting in the identification of
CPLP activities as a subject-matter expert (SME), meeting the requirements of
the roles or job functions, identifying learning and/or competency gaps and
needs within the organization's cybersecurity and privacy program, determining
necessary customizations, and developing a compliance baseline for the
organization
Key considerations for managers of federal Cybersecurity and Privacy Learning
Programs
• Develop, maintain, and implement mandatory organization-wide
CPLPs for all members of the workforce that support enterprise
cybersecurity and privacy goals and objectives. 
• Ensure that the CPLPs align with established rules of behavior
and are consistent with applicable policies, standards, and
guidelines.
• Inform the workforce of available cybersecurity and privacy
resources (internal and external), such as policies, products,
techniques, best practices, or expertise.
• Provide both foundational and more advanced levels of
cybersecurity and privacy training to the workforce, and ensure
that measures are in place to assess the knowledge and skill of
participants.
• In consultation with senior leadership, identify cybersecurity and
privacy behaviors that impact risk in a data-driven manner.
• Identify those who need specialized cybersecurity and privacy
training based on assigned cybersecurity and privacy roles and
responsibilities.
• Measure attitudes, behaviors, and workforce sentiment as part
of tracking the development of a cybersecurity and privacy
culture.
1.2. Scope
This guide describes how a federal organization can design, develop, implement, and maintain a
CPLP as part of an enterprise cybersecurity and privacy program. This includes identifying the
learning needs of the organization's personnel, including federal full-time or part-time
employees, interns, retirees, contractors, external partners, consultants, researchers, and any
users who access the enterprise system or data in support of the organizational mission.
CPLPs are inclusive of various other programs, such as awareness programs, social engineering
campaigns, new hire training, regular training, technical training, role-based training, and other
relevant learning activities conducted within the organization or through external resources
(e.g., courses, certificates, and advanced programs). Additionally, CPLPs sit within a larger
federal organizational effort to address and reduce risks from physical privacy and security
threats, insider threats, and other related human risk management concerns. Those efforts are
outside of the scope of this document.
1.3. CPLP Life Cycle
CPLPs must have actively managed plans throughout their life cycles, which requires attention
and adjustment over time. CPLP managers should carefully and thoughtfully outline, discuss,
review, and document the CPLP's goals and available options. When the owners of the
organization's CPLP adopt an effective strategy and develop a proper planning approach with
measurement and feedback throughout the year, the entire organization remains connected to
the CPLP's objectives. Figure 1 shows the key phases of building and managing a learning
program: Plan and Strategy, Analysis and Design, Development and Implementation, and
Assessment and Improvement. 
These phases can occur in sequence or simultaneously. At any time during the life cycle, CPLP
managers and their teams can develop curriculum, evaluate instructor feedback, send out
practical exercise email quizzes, design posters for awareness, or develop a presentation for
senior leadership. Consider this diagram a reminder of the breadth of work.
In a broad sense, CPLPs are valued elements of the organization's learning culture. To be
effective, the CPLPs must be linked to organizational goals and viewed as adaptive, continuous,
and evolving. In a learning organization, personnel can expand and enhance their current
capabilities to understand and meet new mission requirements. Personnel are respected for
their ability to create and inspire others and are active in creating life-long learning
achievements. If an organization offers other learning programs (e.g., career development,
leadership, and executive development), CPLPs need to be similarly integrated into the
enterprise-wide learning structure.
1.4. Developing a Cybersecurity and Privacy Culture
Developing a cybersecurity and privacy culture is an important component of establishing a
successful CPLP. The culture of the organization should emphasize, reinforce, and drive its
desired behaviors toward cybersecurity and privacy. Risks increase when the dominant culture
fails to recognize the value of engaging individuals in the efforts to support cybersecurity and
privacy best practices. There are two risk sectors that the CPLP can address:
1. Technical risks — Systems are poorly designed, unpatched, or similarly compromised
from the ideal state. This can be addressed with topic-based and role-based training
designed for practitioners with significant cybersecurity and/or privacy responsibilities.
2. Human risks — Individuals fail to maintain their cybersecurity and privacy standards, or
systems have been poorly configured and allow individuals to expose the organization
to undue threats through a variety of human failures.
When a CPLP is valued in the organization's culture, the ability to address both types of risk
increases. The organization's leaders establish a CPLP as a significant component of managing
risks by supporting, championing, and participating in learning activities, from awareness
campaigns to role-based training. CPLP learning managers create rigorous measurement
systems to evaluate the workforce's attitudes, engagement, and support for the program. CPLP
activities contribute to and help measure the organization's cybersecurity and privacy culture.
Human resource leaders reinforce those cultural norms by ensuring that CPLP messaging is part
of onboarding and other workplace materials. Together, these efforts set the tone for the
entire organization.
People are an organization's greatest asset. A cybersecurity and privacy culture supports an
environment in which the entire workforce is well-versed in cybersecurity and privacy risk
management needs, expectations, and values. An organization, in turn, supports an effective
cybersecurity and privacy culture when it understands the needs of the workforce and provides
education and training to help employees and contractors learn expected cybersecurity and
privacy behaviors. Any effective learning activity can be incorporated into a CPLP when it is
respectful, inclusive, and helps learners understand their roles in the organization. The content
should indicate to the learner that they are a valued participant in helping the organization
manage risks. The workforce appreciates that they will contribute to the organization's positive
cybersecurity and privacy culture with the knowledge and skills they acquire by participating in
the CPLP.
Organizations and system owners must develop a CPLP approach that champions every user's
responsibility to protect information and assets. New technologies and risks will continue to
require an organization-wide approach to managing cybersecurity and privacy risks. The NIST
Cybersecurity Framework (CSF) [8], Privacy Framework [9], and Risk Management Framework
(RMF) [10] highlight the importance of awareness and training for personnel as well as
monitoring and improving risk management practices. 
1.5. Relationship Between Cybersecurity and Privacy
While cybersecurity and privacy are independent and separate disciplines, some of their
objectives overlap. Cybersecurity programs are responsible for protecting information,
information systems, and operational technologies from unauthorized access, use, disclosure,
disruption, modification, or destruction (i.e., unauthorized system activity or behavior) in order
to provide confidentiality, integrity, availability, and safety. Privacy programs are responsible
for managing risks to individuals that are associated with data processing throughout the
information life cycle in order to provide predictability, manageability, and disassociability, as
well as ensure compliance with applicable privacy requirements. Managing cybersecurity risks
contributes to managing privacy risks. However, managing cybersecurity risks alone is not
sufficient, as privacy risks can also arise by means unrelated to cybersecurity incidents, as
illustrated in Fig. 2 [9]. 
For example, an organization may combine de-identified data with a new data set during data
processing, resulting in re-identification. Similarly, a de-identified data set may be publicly
released but result in re-identification when combined with other public information. The data
processing activities do not include a cybersecurity incident or breach but still introduce privacy
risks.
Teaching the workforce about different cybersecurity and privacy risks enables them to
effectively address the risks they encounter in their daily activities. For example, all members of
the workforce will need training that helps them understand what a privacy event is and how
one might occur within their organization. They should be able to identify and report a privacy
event. Incident response professionals will need training that helps them determine when a
cybersecurity incident may also be a privacy event, which often requires additional procedures
when responding (e.g., determining if an unsecured site resulted in an actual privacy breach).
Organizations can benefit from a coordinated and flexible approach to developing CPLPs that
effectively meet the organization's needs.
Once an organization understands the relationship between cybersecurity and privacy, it can
determine its approach to developing both integrated and cybersecurity- or privacy-specific
learning activities based on the relevant topics and workforce roles in its environment. For
example, the organization can determine how to effectively:
• Associate learning tracks with work roles (particularly those with data processing
activities) and job performance
• Describe its approach to managing cybersecurity and privacy risks in a way that aligns
with enterprise risk management capabilities
• Incorporate lessons learned from cybersecurity and privacy risks, audit findings,
incidents, events, or changes to governance documents (e.g., laws, regulations, policies,
and standards) into general and role-based training
• Institute learning activities that are appropriate for both internal and external members
of the workforce, including contractors and third parties
• Identify learning obligations in contracts and agreements
• Identify and track metrics to assess the effectiveness of learning efforts (e.g.,
determining whether the number of a certain type of incident or event decreases after a
targeted awareness campaign)
1.5.1. Privacy Risk Management Concepts to Emphasize
Members of the workforce with roles that can impact privacy must also have a clear
understanding of how to identify and address privacy risks that may arise. The NIST Privacy
Framework [9] provides a common language for understanding, managing, and communicating
about privacy risks. Just as the workforce considers the risks associated with security events,
they must also consider privacy events — the potential problems that could arise from system,
product, or service operations with digital or non-digital data through a complete life cycle,
from data collection to disposal. Privacy problems can arise from an individual's direct use of a
product. Some problems can also arise simply from individuals' interactions with systems,
products, and services, even when the data being processed is not directly linked to identifiable
individuals. The problems that individuals can experience as a result of data processing can be
expressed in various ways. The NIST Privacy Framework describes them as ranging from dignity-
type effects (e.g., embarrassment or stigmas) to more tangible harms (e.g., discrimination,
economic loss, or physical harm) [9].
Individuals may experience privacy problems that arise from data processing, and the
organization may in turn experience impacts, such as noncompliance costs, revenue loss from
customer abandonment of products and services, or harm to its external brand reputation or
internal culture. Organizations commonly manage these types of impacts at the enterprise risk
management level. By connecting problematic data actions (i.e., data processing activities that
can cause problems) that individuals experience to these well-understood organizational
impacts, organizations can bring privacy risks into parity with other risks that they manage in
their broader portfolio and drive more informed decision-making about resource allocation to
strengthen privacy programs. Figure 3 illustrates the relationship between privacy risks and
organizational risks [9]. 
CPLPs are most effective when they help the workforce understand both the direct impacts of
privacy events on individuals and the resulting impacts that privacy risks can have on the
organization. For example, a CPLP can address the types of impacts that an individual may
experience from the secondary use of data (e.g., for marketing purposes) and the resulting
consequences to the organization (e.g., costs associated with non-compliance, loss of trust in
the organization, or a shift in mission priorities while addressing the impact).
1.5.2. Coordinating Cybersecurity and Privacy Learning Efforts
An organization's CPLP should coordinate with existing cybersecurity and privacy programs.
With limited resources, duplicating efforts will negatively affect one or both programs. In cases
where there is an integrated cybersecurity and privacy program, this is less likely to be an issue.
1.6. Roles and Responsibilities
While it is important to understand the policies that require agencies to develop and
implement CPLPs, it is also crucial for organizations to understand who is responsible for
cybersecurity and privacy education. This section identifies and describes those in an
organization who are responsible for ensuring that the workforce has access to and completes
their cybersecurity and privacy training.
SP 800-37r2 (Revision 2), Risk Management Framework for Information Systems and
Organizations: A System Life Cycle Approach for Security and Privacy [10], identifies the typical
roles associated with these programs. Since terminology may vary by organization, it can be
useful to refer to the NICE Framework as a complementary tool for identifying those with
responsibilities for managing the CPLP and those who require additional training. The NIST
Privacy Workforce Public Working Group (PWWG) also has information about the tasks,
knowledge, and skills required of privacy professionals in an organization.
The size, maturity, and resources of CPLPs can vary widely, even within the same organization.
The roles and responsibilities for key positions in CPLPs should be documented to help ensure
the most effective use of resources and enable the programs to mature to their desired state.
As such, each organization needs to consider how to assign these roles. Whether there is a
single person serving multiple functions or multiple people collaborating across the
organization, be mindful of the possibility of overlapping responsibilities.
1.6.1. Head of Organization
The head of the organization is responsible and accountable for information security
protections and must prioritize the development of effective CPLPs. This includes implementing
a viable cybersecurity and privacy program with a strong learning component. As noted in SP
800-37r2, the head of the organization ensures that "the organization has adequately trained
personnel to assist in complying with the security and privacy requirements in legislation,
Executive Orders, policies, directives, instructions, standards, and guidelines" [10]. The head of
the organization should:
• Designate leadership roles to manage the organization's CPLPs, develop the strategic
direction for the learning programs, write performance goals and objectives, and review
and manage performance metrics. CPLP managers are responsible for the analysis,
design, development, and delivery of CPLPs and should be given adequate resources to
meet performance goals and objectives.
• Ensure that an agency- or organization-wide cybersecurity and privacy program is
implemented; is well-supported by resources, including personnel and funding; and is
effective at reducing and managing risk.
• Ensure that the agency or organization has sufficiently knowledgeable and skilled
personnel to support its programs and resources and protect individual privacy.
• Ensure that privacy and cybersecurity behaviors related to organizational risks are
identified and measured in a data-driven way. 
• Support the ongoing measurement of the cybersecurity and privacy culture.
1.6.2. Senior Leadership
FISMA [2], OMB Circular A-130 [3], and various other regulations designate the responsibility
for ensuring CPLPs to certain senior official positions. Titles for these positions include
Executive Director, Associate Director, Assistant Director, Division Chief, Chief Information
Officer, Chief Privacy Officer, Chief Information Security Officer, Chief Data Officer, Chief
Artificial Intelligence Officer, Information Owner, System Owner, Mission or Business Owner,
Senior Accountable Official for Risk Management, and System Security or Privacy Officer. These
roles are tasked with setting strategic direction, identifying and managing risks, ensuring that
resources are available, and overseeing personnel with significant responsibilities for
cybersecurity and privacy, including the roles found in appropriate program funding and
management.
In addition, senior leaders must champion workforce requirements by:
• Leading by example and participating in their own CPLP training, as required
• Identifying who has cybersecurity and privacy responsibilities and documenting them in
position descriptions or other relevant work and performance requirement statements
• Identifying relevant learning requirements and documenting them in individual
development plans or other career pathway documentation
• Establishing policies and procedures for learning programs and documenting them in
the organizational records
• If serving in the role of system owner or data owner, designating staff who have
significant cybersecurity and/or privacy responsibilities on their system (e.g., general
support systems and major applications) and ensuring that users and support personnel
are appropriately trained in how to fulfill their responsibilities before being granted
access to system resources
Agencies and organizations should form a Senior Leadership Committee that meets regularly
with CPLP managers to discuss strategy and provide resource support. The CPLP managers will
provide the Senior Leadership Committee with regular reports on the CPLP's performance
throughout the year. If there is an emerging risk or new threat that needs to be addressed in
the CPLP, the Senior Leadership Committee can connect the learning team with operational
teams and SMEs who can provide learning content and resources. Organizations may also
include employee representatives as stakeholders in the Senior Leadership Committee to
ensure that they have a voice in decision-making.
1.6.3. CPLP Managers
CPLP managers have tactical-level responsibilities for the CPLP. In this role, the CPLP manager
should work with the curriculum development professionals and instruction team, security
operations team, information system security officers and managers, CISOs, human resources
(HR), procurement, and risk executive teams to:
• Collaborate with policy SMEs on the interpretation and application of relevant
legislation and organizational policies to guide the CPLP program
• Facilitate the development of learning material that is appropriate and timely for the
intended audiences
• Develop effective approaches to disseminating learning materials to the intended
audience for maximum engagement and impact
• Offer learners and their managers an effective way to provide feedback on the learning
material and its presentation
• Oversee periodic reviews, and update the learning material when necessary
• Ensure the efficient use of all available internal and external resources to effectively
manage the CPLP
• Assist in establishing a tracking and reporting strategy
• Assist in identifying those with significant cybersecurity and privacy responsibilities
• Provide senior leadership with regular status reports on the CPLP's goals, objectives, and
performance metrics
1.6.4. Managers
The term "managers" includes supervisors and those with organizational responsibilities to
ensure that the personnel who report to them comply with cybersecurity and privacy learning
requirements. Managers should:
• Work with the senior leaders and CPLP managers to fulfill shared responsibilities
• Create individual development plans (IDPs) to assess the knowledge gaps of personnel
with significant cybersecurity and privacy roles and responsibilities
• Promote the professional development of personnel with cybersecurity and privacy
responsibilities, and encourage them to acquire industry-recognized certifications
• Ensure that personnel understand the specific rules of each system and application that
they use
• Ensure that all personnel (including the general workforce) maintain competence in
cybersecurity and privacy by participating in the CPLP
• Work to reduce errors and omissions by personnel that might be caused by a lack of
awareness or training
1.6.5. System User
The system user is an individual authorized to access information and information systems to
perform assigned duties. As noted in SP 800-37r2,
System user responsibilities include, but are not limited to, adhering to
organizational policies that govern acceptable use of organizational
systems, using the organization-provided information technology
resources for defined purposes only; and reporting anomalous or
suspicious system behavior. [10] 
2. CPLP Plan and Strategy
A CPLP strategic plan provides an organization-wide view of the current state of cybersecurity
and privacy learning, where the organization wants or needs to be, and how to address the gap
between those two states (e.g., resources, staffing.) The CPLP strategic plan helps CPLP
managers ensure that the organization's personnel are ready to meet the challenges of the
cybersecurity and privacy risks associated with their work.
OMB Circular A-130 [3] establishes a general policy for the planning, budgeting, governance,
acquisition, and management of federal information, personnel, equipment, funds, IT
resources, and supporting infrastructure and services. Each federal agency is required to
develop, maintain, and implement a comprehensive CPLP to meet its mission needs. To develop
a robust program with a variety of materials, including offering learners engaging opportunities
to stay current on relevant cybersecurity and privacy risks to their organization, the CPLP must
have an effective strategy for development, implementation, and continual improvement.
This section discusses the steps involved in building a CPLP strategic plan that takes the
organization's objectives, unique requirements, audience types, and program scope into
consideration. The planning stages will also help the organization evaluate its priorities, budget,
resources, and communication plans.
2.1. Building the Strategic Plan
The CPLP strategic plan must intersect with the organization's strategic plan for continual
workforce development. The owner of the CPLP should understand the structure and mission of
the organization to determine where the organization's strategy originates. Some agencies are
organized with a top-down approach, where a headquarters owns the mission and provides
guidance on the CPLP strategy. Other organizations develop CPLPs in various business functions
or combine both approaches. Documenting the CPLP strategy and how it supports the goals of
the organization's risk management strategy shows executive leadership why the CPLP is
needed.
A well-developed CPLP strategic plan describes how an organization's risk management and
cybersecurity and privacy culture enable all personnel to assess risks with their every action and
decision. With agencies of varying sizes, a program that works for one will not necessarily work
for another. Each agency must develop a program that will work best for them. The CPLP
strategy should always be clearly stated and will most likely be reviewed by the Senior
Leadership Committee and agreed upon before any funding is approved.
The CPLP strategic plan should address key items, including:
• Vision and mission
• Strategic goals and objectives
• Training approaches and action plans
• Tactics that help pursue the objectives
• Metrics and reporting
The CPLP strategic plan should also:
• Describe how it supports a culture of risk-based decision-making and emphasizes the
importance of transformational workforce learning, including the development of
knowledge, skills, and capabilities to help workers succeed now and in the future
• Explain how the program will meet knowledge and skills gaps, enhance overall
capabilities, and support a culture of personnel engagement in their cybersecurity and
privacy roles
• Intersect with the overall mission of the organization (e.g., mission and vision
statements, risk tolerance, learning goals, objectives, outcomes, methods, and
organizational structure)
• Include information about organizational policies and policy owners, such as how
existing rules of behavior, policies, procedures, and guidance will be communicated to
personnel
• Include metrics and measurements that help determine whether the current programs
are meeting goals and learners are retaining knowledge and skills, changing their
behaviors, and developing positive attitudes in support of the cybersecurity and privacy
culture
• Include operational tactics, such as the tools, mechanisms, or methods that the program
owners will leverage to achieve program objectives
• Identify key stakeholders, leaders, and roles, many of whom will be within the offices of
the CIO, CISO, Senior Agency Information Security Officer (SAISO), Senior Agency Official
for Privacy (SAOP), CPO, and HR
• Use risk assessment results and existing strategies to inform the alignment between
program development, learning materials, and risk management
o Existing CPLPs may also benefit from a gap analysis or current program
assessment to clearly distinguish between the current and target states and
enable the program leadership to shape their approach accordingly.
• Identify how the program will meet regulatory and compliance requirements to
minimize risks by educating personnel on their roles in the cybersecurity and privacy
culture of the organization
• Plan for and support the needs of a diverse workforce, including those with accessibility
requirements and those who work remotely or travel frequently
• Include learning methods that are experiential and atomize content (i.e., look at how
existing content can be separated into smaller items or repurposed)
2.2. Developing CPLP Policies and Procedures
CPLP policies and procedures work together to express what the organization wants to do and
how to do it. Policies are clear and simple statements, rules, or assertions that specify the
correct or expected behavior of an entity. They provide the guiding principles for meeting the
mission and conducting operations, and they can ensure consistent and effective training and
awareness methods. Procedures describe how policies will be implemented or enacted. They
are written to include who will do what, the steps or phases of the action, defined criteria or
implementation levels, and related documentation.
For both cybersecurity and privacy business operations, policies and procedures identify
acceptable practices and expectations, as well as guidance for how to train personnel on those
requirements and expectations. CPLP policies and procedures should align with broader
organizational policies and clearly describe the expectations of the learning programs.
The benefits of establishing policies and procedures include:
• Clear expectations for the workforce throughout the organization
• Documented executive support for the program
• Auditable management and oversight capabilities
• Identified cybersecurity and privacy assurance strategic goals and objectives
• Clearly identified CPLP information and resources
• A structured approach to training personnel on their cybersecurity and privacy
responsibilities
• Documentation of the evolution of a cybersecurity and privacy culture
2.2.1. Examples of Learning Program Policy Statements
The following example policy statements provide context on what is important when
establishing, reviewing, or updating CPLP policies.
• The CIO and CISO must establish a cybersecurity training program for users of
[organization] information systems.
• The CPO must establish a privacy training program for users of [organization] data.
• All personnel, contractors, or others who work on behalf of [organization] accessing
[organization] systems must receive initial training and regular refresher training in
cybersecurity and privacy awareness and accepted cybersecurity and privacy practices
• Personnel must complete cybersecurity and privacy awareness training within 24 hours
of being granted a user account. If a user fails to meet this training requirement, user
access will not be granted or will be suspended.
• All personnel, contractors, or others who work on behalf of [organization] with
significant security responsibilities must receive role-based training prior to obtaining
access to systems that process sensitive information and will be required to complete
refresher training each fiscal year.
• User accounts and access privileges, including access to email, must be disabled for
employees who have not completed required refresher training unless a waiver is
granted by the CISO, the CISO's delegates, or the information systems security manager
(ISSM).
• Privacy managers, the CISO, and ISSMs must prepare and submit required awareness
and role-based training plans.
• Privacy managers, the CISO, and ISSMs must prepare and submit reports on workforce
behavioral changes, attitudinal measures, and other metrics associated with developing
cybersecurity and privacy cultural norms with content, frequency, format, and
distribution at the request of the CPO and CIO.
• The CISO or their delegates must regularly review information security awareness and
role-based training programs.
SP 800-53r5 [11] control AT-1 describes the policies and procedures for cybersecurity and
privacy awareness and training (learning) programs.
2.3. Aligning Strategies, Goals, Objectives, and Tactics
Organizations can utilize a variety of techniques to identify and describe the steps needed to
implement a program. One method is to begin by identifying the organization's goals, the
objectives to meet those goals, and the operational tactics to meet those objectives. Each goal
should have objectives that will often include measurable targets, such as identifying who
needs role-based training or training a percentage of the organization by a specified date. It is a
best practice to choose "SMART" goals: specific, measurable, achievable, relevant, and timebound. Each program objective will have tactics associated with them. Tactics are tools,
methods, or mechanisms that enable the program to pursue the objective identified in the
plan's strategy. Ultimately, every individual item in the plan — down to the most detailed
tactical level — can be traced back to where it originates in the overall strategy. Every activity
should support the overall CPLP strategy. Managing the steps to implement CPLPs and ensure
that the program meets organizational learning needs requires discipline on the part of the
team.
The following two scenarios demonstrate each of the implementation steps.
2.3.1. Scenario 1: Protecting Sensitive Printed Data
A physical security review of an area in the organization where sensitive data is routinely
handled by many employees finds that basic steps are not being taken to maintain a "clean
desk." The privacy policy requires files that contain sensitive data to be kept in folders in locked
cabinets. During the review, printed files that contained sensitive data were located in paper
stacks and folders that were loosely placed on top of the desks.
The CPLP manager seeks to improve the handling of printed sensitive data and ensure that
personnel follow the protection requirements. They determine that a fresh, eye-catching
awareness flier or poster might encourage better employee adherence to the policy and reduce
this risk.
An executive offers available funding dedicated to producing printed materials. The CPLP
manager can utilize that funding to print "Keep It Clean" stickers to attach to work folders and
provide a case of such folders to each member of the workforce in the area that handles
sensitive data.
In this example, the CPLP manager continually monitored the workplace and risks, coordinated
the budget, planned the printing of the stickers, and worked with management to deliver the
materials. Because this is a one-time issue, the planning steps were streamlined under the
existing program.
• Strategic Plan — Meet privacy compliance requirements.
• Strategic Goal — Support the organization's privacy program.
• Objective — Ensure that all employees who handle sensitive data are trained and aware
of their privacy responsibilities.
• Tactic — Provide "Keep It Clean" stickers for folders in areas of the organization where
sensitive data is processed.
2.3.2. Scenario 2: Developing a New Regulation-Required Training Program
A new regulation requires all cybersecurity professionals to implement a specific procedure in
their daily routines.
The CPLP manager works with the cybersecurity policy owners to understand and interpret the
regulation. Together, they define a strategy with goals, objectives, and a set of program tactics
to provide new training to all members of the workforce and meet the new requirements with
specific new procedures. The CPLP manager decides to work with organizational training staff
to create an online experience that would also enable remote workers to fully participate.
As the course is being completed, the CPLP manager works with organizational leaders and
management to identify expected measures of completion and success and to ensure that all
necessary members of the workforce are identified and trained. As an element of continuous
monitoring, the CPLP manager works with the learning office and leadership to test the
completion and success of the training.
• Strategic Plan — Enable all cybersecurity professionals to recognize their
responsibilities and develop the necessary skills to meet new regulatory requirements.
• Strategic Goal — Update training for all cybersecurity professionals that complies with
the new regulatory requirements.
• Objective — Launch (or update) an online training program that will enable all
cybersecurity professionals to meet the training objectives on the specific procedure in
the new regulations, even from remote work locations.
• Tactic — Work with management to schedule the training and ensure 100 % compliance
and develop a continuous monitoring program to test completion rates and provide
daily tracking data to managers.
2.4. Determining CPLP Measurements and Metrics
Program measurements and metrics are the key drivers for the Assessment and Improvement
phase of the CPLP life cycle (see Sec. 1.3). CPLP measurements enable an organization to
describe and quantify the learning program, show the effectiveness and impact of the program,
understand where changes are required for success, meet budgetary and resource
requirements, and make data-driven decisions. Through the development and monitoring of
CPLP measurements, an organization can better address their learning goals and resources.
For CPLP purposes, it is necessary to differentiate between quantitative and qualitative
measurements. A quantitative measurement is assessed by assigning a number or category to
an object to describe an attribute of that object, such as using a 1-5 scale to assess the
effectiveness of learning content. For example, a post-learning program assessment instruction
might state: "Rate your knowledge level of social engineering exploits on a scale of 1-5, where 1
is a low level of knowledge and 5 is a high level of knowledge." Such a measurement enables
the learning content to be evaluated with an average or mean score. 
A qualitative measurement is based on descriptive data, for example, data collected through
observations, interviews, focus groups, or open-ended text fields in surveys.
2.4.1. Measurements
Developing and establishing CPLP measurements requires careful consideration and should be
driven by the program's goals and objectives as well as any regulatory requirements. CPLP
managers should be prepared to answer some common questions, such as:
• What laws, policies, and regulations apply to our organization?
• How often is reporting required?
• What data is required in the report?
• What data for potential audits are we required to maintain and for what length of time?
The CPLP manager should identify how the measurements will be collected, how frequently,
who should have access to the measurements, and how the reports will be documented and
shared. While laws, regulations, and policies often set specific measurable requirements, CPLP
measurements must go beyond simply achieving compliance. The CPLP's impact on workforce
capabilities, attitude, and behavioral changes must also be measured.
The measurements and metrics should be tied directly to the learning goals, objectives, and
outcomes of the CPLP program and organization. While these terms are often used
interchangeably, they each have a specific meaning with regard to the designation and
collection of measurements and metrics. Whether it is at the organizational, course, module, or
lesson level, these terms retain their distinct meanings. For clarification, this document
provides the following high-level definitions for these terms and describes how they are used in
the learning community:
• Goal: The goal is a general statement written from the organizational or instructional
team perspective that describes the intended competency and desired tasks,
knowledge, and/or skills that a participant will learn from the activity.
• Objective: The objectives are specific statements written from the organizational or
instructional team perspective that describe what the developer wants the participant
to do after completing the learning activity. Objectives typically relate to the specific
subject or content that the instructional material will cover.
• Outcome: Learning outcomes are learner-centered and describe how the learner will be
evaluated. The written learning outcomes should be measurable, achievable, and
outcome-based. A general formula for writing learning outcomes is:
o After participating in the learning activity, learners will be able to (insert
measurable verb) and (insert learning statement).
Table 2 shows examples of learning goals, objectives, and outcomes and how their differences
impact the generation of measurements for a program. 
CPLP managers should build programs with efficient data gathering techniques to provide
effective reporting information. This will likely include collecting data on employees that may
carry a heightened sensitivity due to context (e.g., training records are often part of
employment or contract records and can be tied to performance evaluations or result in
consequences for failure to take required training). CPLP managers must identify and manage
the cybersecurity and privacy risks associated with processing learning data, including risks
associated with learning management systems (LMSs) and reporting practices.
2.4.1.1. Quantitative Measurements
Quantitative measurements are expressed in numerical form and are usually referred to as
objective data. The combination of quantitative and qualitative measurements provides a
holistic understanding of the CPLP. 
Some common examples of quantitative learning program data include:
• Training attendance, performance assessments, and completion rates
• Closed-ended employee survey feedback
• Cost of development and delivery per participant
• Usage of online or other digital learning programs, such as the number of logins, time
spent online accessing the content, and how often the site or content is accessed
• Tracking the number of participants who attempted and obtained commercial
certifications
• Cybersecurity incident data limited to employee-generated incidents or topics that can
be mitigated or addressed in the learning programs
• Metrics on incident reporting that demonstrate employee ability to recognize and
report potential cybersecurity events
• Phishing or other simulated attack response tracking
• Longitudinal data that depicts program impacts, including employee behavior change,
over time (e.g., employee implementation of operating system updates in a timely
fashion, increased adoption of multi-factor authentication, adherence to password
management rules)
• Employee testing data before the learning program, immediately after the learning
program, and three months after attending the course to assess knowledge retention
• Performance data by department, including technical performance measurements
• Frequency of updating the training material to evaluate relevancy
• Extent of cybersecurity or privacy events, such as reduced downtime or outages due to
events (these may be indicators for role-based training)
• Ability to recognize and report privacy information disclosures or misuse, as evidenced
by employee adoption of reporting tools
• Changes following technical training may also provide measurements, such as reduction
of accounts with privileged access, identification of high-value assets, new network
segmentation, or additional controls written in acquisition and budget documentation
2.4.1.2. Qualitative Measurements
Qualitative measurements are based on descriptive data, for example, data collected through
observations, interviews, focus groups, or open-ended text fields in surveys and can provide
insight into the learning experience.
Some common examples of qualitative learning program data include:
• Instructor/presenter observations and feedback
• Attitude surveys related to workforce support for the cybersecurity and privacy culture
• Open-ended feedback or survey fields
• Detailed reports from participants, such as written feedback sent to the program
• Focus group discussions with participants, instructors, or other stakeholders
• Observations of learning program instruction and interactions
• Observations and analyses of instructional case studies
• Interviews with participants, instructors, or other stakeholders
• Suggestion box submissions
2.4.2. From Measurements to Metrics
Developing metrics can be one of the most important yet challenging parts of the CPLP effort.
How the organization defines and collects measurements will lead to the definition and analysis
of the metrics. An effective set of metrics can help improve content quality and learner
engagement, obtain support from the organization, increase funding, reveal impacts on the
cybersecurity and privacy risk management program, and demonstrate returns on investment.
In recent learning program research efforts by NIST, participants reported [6] that despite best
intentions, their organizations often used a limited number of metrics that did not provide a
complete view of program effectiveness.
The following examples show how measurements provide the data for metrics:
Course Attendance
• Metric: The percentage of learners who registered and attended the learning course
• Measurements: Registration and attendance records (quantitative)
• Analysis: Identify differences or trends in how many learners registered versus how
many attended
Course Completion
• Metric: The percentage and attributes of learners who completed the learning course
• Measurement: The number of learners, their work roles, and their organization, who
attended and completed a course (quantitative)
• Analysis: Identify differences or trends in how many learners attended and how many of
those in attendance completed the course
Engagement During Courses
• Metric: The level of interaction from participants, such as how many engaged in
discussions or completed interactive elements
• Measurement: Number of learners who participated in group activities or lab activities
(quantitative), comments and feedback received from learners (qualitative), and how
many participants posed questions or participated in chat features (quantitative)
• Analysis: Identify trends based on how many learners participated in engagement
activities and whether there was positive or negative feedback from participants about
the activity
Course Cost per Participant
• Metric: The cost of the program compared with the number of participants who
attended the course
• Measurement: The cost of the course (quantitative) and the number who attended the
course (quantitative)
• Analysis: Identify cost effectiveness by reviewing attendance versus costs
Behavior Change per Participant
• Metric: Percentage of participants who changed a behavior in the workplace (e.g.,
reported a suspected phishing email)
• Measurement: Number of participants who received a phishing test email and reported
it appropriately (quantitative)
• Analysis: Identify the impact of training on recognizing phishing emails and how they are
reported
CPLP managers rely on CPLP measurements and metrics to assess the effectiveness of their
learning programs and ensure that the learning outcomes are achieved. SP 800-55v1 [12]
provides guidance on the selection and aggregation of information security measurements and
the development of an information security measurement program.
2.5. Learning Program Audience Segments
When considering the organizational personnel whose learning objectives will be addressed
with the CPLP, it is recommended to view each individual as belonging to one or more learning
program audience segment. Every person who participates in the CPLP is counted in the "all
users" group. The second group includes privileged access account holders who have
organization-approved access to restricted systems or data that requires special care. These
individuals will receive additional cybersecurity and privacy training to minimize risks to
systems and data. The third group includes employees and contractors with significant
cybersecurity and/or privacy responsibilities who require an individualized program of rolebased training to ensure that their knowledge and skills are sufficient to execute the tasks
required for their work. There will likely be some overlap between the privileged access
account holders and those with significant cybersecurity and/or privacy responsibilities. 
2.5.1. All Users
In a typical scenario, all of the organization's personnel will participate in the CPLP, agree to
abide by the acceptable use policy or standards of behavior, complete the recurring learning
program training, and attend, complete, view, and receive the other various ongoing program
elements.
SP 800-53r5 [11] control AT-2, Awareness and Training, refers to "all user" training as
cybersecurity and privacy "literacy" training. As part of or after completing the recurring
training, users will sign a rules of behavior policy that defines the behaviors required to gain
and keep system access. SP 800-53r5 also indicates that the training will need to be updated for
any system changes or following any organization-defined events:
Subsequent literacy training may be satisfied by one or more short ad
hoc sessions and include topical information on recent attack schemes,
changes to organizational security and privacy policies, revised security
and privacy expectations, or a subset of topics from the initial training.
Updating literacy training and awareness content on a regular basis
helps to ensure that the content remains relevant. Events that may
precipitate an update to literacy training and awareness content
include, but are not limited to, assessment or audit findings, security
incidents or breaches, or changes in applicable laws, Executive Orders,
directives, regulations, policies, standards, and guidelines.
All users in the workforce (commonly referred to as "system users" and "general users") are
critical to reducing unintentional errors and vulnerabilities. The organization's personnel may 
include full-time and part-time employees, contractors, consultants, foreign or domestic guest
researchers, visitors, guests, other agency personnel, and other collaborators or associates who
require access. All users must:
• Understand and comply with the organization's cybersecurity, physical security, and
privacy policies and procedures
• Understand and accept the rules of behavior for the systems and applications to which
they have access
• Work with management to meet training needs
• Be aware of actions they can take to better protect their organization's information and
environment
Examples of topics that the CPLP may address include:
• Understanding how cybersecurity and privacy activities support the organization's
mission and business objectives
• Using proper passwords or multi-factor authentication
• Handling data
• Using AI or other enterprise tools
• Learning remote access procedures
• Collecting and protecting PII
• Reporting any suspected incidents or violations of cybersecurity and privacy policies
• Following the rules established to avoid social engineering attacks (e.g., ransomware
and phishing) and to deter the spread of spam and malware
• Identifying and addressing privacy risks during information processing
• Knowing where to find the organization's cybersecurity and privacy resources and
points of contact
The organization may also be able to identify those who are subject to or who pose greater
human risk due to their role, the applications they use, or simply because they have not yet
committed to adopting best practices for cybersecurity and privacy. The CPLP manager — in
consultation with the individual's manager and the IT department — should develop additional
mechanisms for identifying risky behaviors and metrics for evaluating participation in the "all
user" learning program and consider ways to incentivize behavioral change in positive, nonpunitive ways.
2.5.2. Privileged Access Account Holders
Individuals with privileged access accounts are trusted with additional access or responsibilities
to perform functions that ordinary users are not authorized to perform, such as configuring
network management and granting system access (e.g., system administration privileges). Due
to their ability to access critical resources, privileged access account holders require additional
training to ensure that they understand their account access privileges and do not accidently
cause or exploit vulnerabilities or misuse data. For each type of privileged access account, the
CPLP manager must coordinate training with the account holder's manager or supervisor,
human capital officer, and training managers to ensure that training is delivered and kept
current.
2.5.3. Staff With Significant Cybersecurity and/or Privacy Responsibilities
Personnel with significant cybersecurity and/or privacy responsibilities — including some
privileged access account holders (e.g., "super users") — have rights or access to sensitive or
critical systems and will require additional training. For example, a manager of an HR
environment who ensures that the system is properly configured and available or a Chief
Human Capital Officer (CHCO) who collaborates on setting policies for the system will have
significant cybersecurity and privacy responsibilities. Network and IT administrators who
manage the system and network access are privileged access account holders. If their work
roles include monitoring for data loss or other privacy and cybersecurity issues, then they also
have significant cybersecurity and/or privacy responsibilities that require additional role-based
training. This access can be rescinded when a holder's work role changes.
SP 800-53r5 [11] control AT-3, Role-Based Training, provides a definition for the training
required:
Comprehensive role-based training addresses management,
operational, and technical roles and responsibilities covering physical,
personnel, and technical controls. Role-based training also includes
policies, procedures, tools, methods, and artifacts for the security and
privacy roles defined. Organizations provide the training necessary for
individuals to fulfill their responsibilities related to operations and
supply chain risk management within the context of organizational
security and privacy programs. Role-based training also applies to
contractors who provide services to federal agencies.
This training is typically associated with job duties determined by organizational leaders (e.g.,
the agency's CIO, CPO, or CISO) and the employee's manager or supervisor and is documented
in the employee's performance plan. Personnel in these work roles may require professional
development to maintain their status or memberships, such as annual certifications or courses.
Examples of typical role-based training recipients include the CISO, privacy officers,
cybersecurity managers, cybersecurity and privacy analysts, and incident responders.
Cybersecurity work roles and competency areas are explored in SP 800-181r1 [5], which
describes the knowledge, skills, and tasks associated with cybersecurity-related work.
2.5.4. Determining Who Has Significant Cybersecurity and/or Privacy Responsibilities
FISMA [2] requires personnel with significant cybersecurity and/or privacy responsibilities to
receive role-based training. Additional guidance can be found in SP 800-37r2 [10], SP 800-53r5 
[11], and SP 800-181r1 [5]. In combination, these documents assist with the identification of
roles and functions in the cybersecurity workforce that require role-based training.
Determining who in the organization will participate in role-based training is a multi-step
process that begins with defining the significant cybersecurity and privacy work roles in the
organization and identifying the staff who are aligned with the designated work roles. Often,
the determination begins with senior leadership and direction from the office of the CIO, CISO,
or CPO in partnership with HR. CPLP managers should participate closely in this effort to
identify those with significant cybersecurity and privacy responsibilities.
These work roles should also be included in position descriptions, hierarchy charts, and
responsibilities to show how the work required to achieve a particular objective has been
identified. Individuals may assume additional work roles based on their particular skills,
organizational policies regarding cross-training, and organizational staffing levels. SP 800-181r1
[5] identifies work roles for cybersecurity and is a detailed lexicon for understanding the related
knowledge and skills that are typical for such roles.
2.6. Determining Scope and Complexity
The ultimate goal of a CPLP is to reduce cybersecurity and privacy risks to the organization
through cultural and behavioral changes, not simply to achieve compliance.
The complexity of the material must be determined before development begins and be
commensurate with the role of the person who will undergo the learning effort. Material
should be developed based on two important criteria: 1) the target attendee's role and 2) the
cybersecurity and privacy responsibilities required for that role. This will require coordination
with HR and CLOs (or equivalent). Individuals who receive training will appreciate the effort
made to ensure that they understand the material in a manner appropriate to their learning
needs and the nature of the work that they do.
2.7. CPLP Elements
A typical CPLP includes a variety of learning program elements that are delivered to diverse
audiences through various platforms and methods. CPLP managers will identify the necessary
and most effective types of program elements for each audience type per learning goal and
adjust their selections to match their available budget and schedule considerations.
The typical CPLP elements are:
• Awareness activities
• Experiential learning and practical exercises
• Training
Employees may initially believe that the CPLP is the annual or regularly scheduled training
course or event delivered to all users, which may include informal department programs, a
mandatory presentation delivered in an auditorium, or an online course. Other learning 
program elements are targeted for those with significant cybersecurity and/or privacy
responsibilities and those who are privileged access account holders. A CPLP program will
consist of the mandatory elements (required by policy and learning objectives for all CPLP
learning participants) and the many other activities implemented throughout the CPLP life cycle
to reinforce these messages.
Regardless of the learning activity, the learning goal for these events is to ensure that personnel
are aware of their roles and responsibilities for protecting information and assets and are able
to take appropriate action to respond to a variety of cybersecurity and privacy risks.
2.7.1. Awareness Activities
Cybersecurity and privacy awareness learning activities should be conducted on an ongoing
basis throughout the year to ensure that employees are aware of their roles within the
organization and the appropriate steps they must take to protect information, assets, and
individuals' privacy. Activities can be campaign-oriented or ad hoc based on the subject matter,
threats, or vulnerabilities or take place during seasonal events.
Examples of awareness activities that are appropriate for all users include:
• Messages on logon screens, organizational screen savers, and email signature blocks
• Employee newsletters with cybersecurity and privacy articles
• Posters (physical or digital) with cybersecurity and privacy tips
• A Cybersecurity Awareness Month (October) or Data Privacy Awareness Week (January)
activity fair
• Cybersecurity and privacy reminders and tips on employee materials (e.g., pens,
notepads, etc.)
• Periodic or as-needed email messages that provide timely tips or are sent in response to
a cybersecurity or privacy event or issue
2.7.2. Experiential Learning
Experiential learning activities or practical exercises are specific learning scenarios that simulate
events and incidents. The practical exercises can include social engineering efforts (e.g.,
phishing, smishing, and vishing) in the form of simulations, learning games, quizzes on
identifying and processing data, tabletop exercises, hands-on virtual lab exercises, contingency
plan and disaster recovery scenarios, and attack or defend scenarios conducted in cyber ranges.
For example, in an organization-wide all-user phishing exercise, a "tricky" email is sent to users
to see whether they can spot a phishing attempt or if they can be tricked into clicking on a link
to a malicious website or opening an infected attachment. Phishing exercises can also target
learning for those in specific roles, such as leadership or known administrators. Begin by
determining the current click rates for a specific group of users or by work roles to understand
if there is a need for more targeted training. The NIST Phish Scale can be helpful in identifying 
and measuring behaviors for phishing threats. These exercises offer opportunities to collect
metrics and measurements, which are usually referred to as "click-through" or reported
measurements. These types of measurements indicate whether the user reported the email as
a phishing attempt or whether they clicked on a link or opened an attachment. Some
organizations include "report phishing" capabilities on their email platform (e.g., a button on
the platform's menu) to encourage best practices.
The organization's legal team should be included in the design and review of planned phishing
exercises to avoid negative impacts, such as using legitimate brands or naming federal
organizations in the phishing "bait," which could result in emails or calls to those entities. In
addition, since employees may not like being tricked, it is important to tell employees that the
organization is conducting phishing exercises on a random basis and that the results will be
used to guide future learning activities. These activities should not be punitive, nor should any
employee be called out for their response. When viewed as learning opportunities, the phishing
exercises can provide important data on vulnerabilities and which employees may need
additional learning support.
Other experiential learning exercises may be better suited for those with significant
cybersecurity or privacy responsibilities (e.g., role-based training), such as tabletop exercises
and contingency plan scenarios. Additional examples may be found in NIST SP 800-84, Guide to
Test, Training, and Exercise Programs for IT Plans and Capabilities [13].
2.7.3. Training Content
Training is a broad term that includes the learning program content designed to increase or
improve job-related knowledge and skills. Some of the techniques that an organization can
employ include:
• Synchronous training: Instructors and learners participate together in a virtual or
physical classroom-based learning environment.
• Asynchronous training: The learner can access material individually and on demand.
This is sometimes called "self-paced" because the learner accesses content based on
their schedule.
• Virtual-led: Instruction occurs in a virtual or simulated environment and is presented or
facilitated by an instructor in real time.
• Cyber range: Instruction takes place in a safe, web-based practice environment (i.e.,
sandbox) and delivers hands-on realistic training, scenarios, challenges, and exercises.
• Podcasts: Learning is asynchronous, self-paced, and audio-based.
• Animations: Animations can visually represent a process, system, or complex
cybersecurity or privacy concept. 
• Demonstration: The instructor provides the learner with the step-by-step actions of a
process or activity. This can be delivered in-person, recorded, or via other methods.
• Scenario-based exercise: The facilitator leads discussions on topical, situation-driven
scenarios that may be customized to the organization or a specific department. These
are also referred to as "tabletop" exercises.
• Self-paced online training: This asynchronous technique is currently popular for
distributed environments. Attendees of a web-based session can study independently
and learn at their own pace. Testing and accountability features can gauge performance.
Web-based training can include video, audio, and interactive techniques, such as drag-and-drop or fill-in-the-blank exam responses.
• On-site instructor-led training: This is one of the oldest and most popular techniques
for delivering training material to an audience. The biggest advantage of this technique
is the interactive nature of the instruction. It can also include peer presentations and
mentoring.
Blending various training delivery techniques can be an effective way to present material and
hold an audience's attention. For example, showing videos during an instructor-led session
allows the audience to focus on a different source of information. The video can also reinforce
what the instructor has been presenting.
2.8. Establishing the CPLP Plan Priorities
During the planning phase of the CPLP life cycle, evaluate the organization's critical risk factors
to determine the learning priorities. If a phased approach is necessary due to budget
constraints or resource availability, some factors to consider are:
• Role and organizational impact — It is very common to address priority in terms of
organizational roles and risks. Broad-based awareness initiatives that address the
enterprise-wide mandate may receive high priority because the rules of good
cybersecurity and privacy practices can be delivered to the workforce quickly. It is also
common to look at high-trust/high-impact positions (see Sec. 1.6) and ensure that they
receive high priority in the rollout strategy. These types of positions are typically
commensurate with the type of access that these users possess, or the specialized
requirements assigned to their roles and job duties. In addition, the protection of high-value or critical assets or the deployment of privacy-sensitive products or services can
also drive priorities.
• State of current compliance — This involves looking at major gaps in the CPLP (e.g., gap
analysis) and targeting deficient areas for attention.
• Availability of materials and resources — Determine whether appropriate learning
materials and necessary resources are readily available for the program element.
Repurpose and utilize existing materials in new ways, when possible.
2.9. Developing the CPLP Plan
The CPLP plan defines sufficiently detailed program elements that support the strategy for each
activity or campaign. Many organizations utilize standard program plan templates that provide
baselines for organizational expectations. The exact level of detail within the plan will vary,
depending on organizational and program requirements and resources. As the program
matures, the CPLP manager should conduct recurring reviews (i.e., at least annually) of the
plan, along with the stakeholders and individuals who will support and manage the program.
2.10. CPLP Resources
An important element of developing the CPLP strategy is to determine what currently exists
within the organization and what resources are dedicated to existing programs. If the learning
program does not yet exist or requires significant redesign or updates, refer to the program
strategy process (outlined in Sec. 2.1) to review the most important program elements for
inclusion. Resources are typically defined as any asset that is required to meet goals and
objectives, such as people, materials, equipment, and technology. An important consideration
in obtaining resources is establishing a CPLP budget.
2.10.1. Establishing a CPLP Budget
Once the CPLP strategy has been approved by senior leadership (identified in Sec. 1.6.2) and
priorities have been established, funding requirements must be added to the plan. A
determination must be made regarding the extent of funding support to be allocated based on
the strategic goals. Senior leadership should help the CPLP manager understand or establish
their budget. While each program will have different funding needs, some typical costs include:
• Training personnel, such as program managers, instructional designers, instructors,
graphic artists, web developers, and programmers
• Classroom space and materials, such as whiteboards, markers, erasers, flip charts, note
pads, pens, pencils, and name cards
• Printed program materials, handouts, and certificates or electronic distribution that may
require web-based platforms
• Online (i.e., virtual) space to distribute materials, including synchronous activities (e.g.,
webinars) and asynchronous activities (e.g., job aids, recorded sessions, and web-based
content)
• LMSs for content delivery, participant registration, and course completion records
• Licenses (per seat) for learning platforms or content
• Awareness materials, such as posters, notepads, and themed items for awareness
activities
• Professional services for curriculum design and development and the presentation of
content
• Privacy and cybersecurity culture mapping efforts
Organizations with a limited (or even no additional) budget for cybersecurity and privacy
initiatives can still establish an effective CPLP by leveraging existing resources, implementing
cost-effective monitoring solutions, and prioritizing cybersecurity and privacy as a shared
responsibility across the organization. Some materials may be available from other federal
agencies, partner organizations, or online vendor resources. Some materials may already exist
in-house and should be inventoried and evaluated to determine whether they are current and
meet the existing learning goals. The implementation timeline will help indicate when
additional funding may be required to support tools, major curriculum and content
deliverables, new staffing requirements, and other learning program elements and activities.
The following are example questions that can help guide the development of budget
requirements:
• What mission and business needs will be influenced or impacted?
• Are there regulations, legislative requirements, or other internal or external
requirements that would influence the decision?
• What shared federal or other external resources can be leveraged?
• What internal resources can be leveraged? This can include existing content and
delivery mediums.
• Is it more cost-effective to develop the material in-house versus outsourcing?
• Is the learning requirement specific to the organization or the system? This would
include policies, procedures, or rules of behavior.
• When must the learning material be ready? Are there critical schedules that need to
be met? Would outsourcing allow for delivery schedules to be met?
• How many people need to be trained?
• How often will the material need to be updated?
• What delivery mediums will be required, and what are the associated costs?
• Are there in-house resources to do the job?
• Does the organization have the subject-matter expertise to provide content for the
training?
• Are resources available to effectively manage and monitor contractor activity during
acquisitions?
• Does the course sensitivity preclude the use of a contractor?
• What is the cost in staff time, and how can the CPLP achieve the desired results while
maximizing its return on investment (ROI)?
CPLP managers must work with senior leadership to advocate for the program against
competing priorities, budget constraints, and staff time costs and to develop a strategy to
address any shortfall in funding that may impact the organization's ability to meet its learning
goals. This may require adjusting the learning strategy to be more in line with the available
budget, advocating for additional funding, or reallocating current resources. It may also mean
that the program plan needs to be phased in over some predefined time period as funding
becomes available.
2.10.2. CPLP Staff and Locations
Those who have managed federal CPLPs report that training the workforce requires a
combination of technical knowledge and professional attributes, such as communication,
creativity, and interpersonal skills [7]. If the organization does not have the budget for CPLP
course developers, research what other agencies or organizations of similar size have done to
meet their own needs. Some organizations may have in-house instructional designers,
curriculum developers, instructors, web developers, communications experts, and graphic
designers. Other organizations may need to include these professional costs in the budget for a
new project and identify qualified contractors or external courses.
Different information requires different methods of delivery. Some program elements will be
appropriate to deliver via online learning, while others will necessitate both instructors and
physical classroom locations. Determining these requirements in the planning stage will allow
for appropriate resource allocation (e.g., rooms to be reserved, computers and projectors
secured, etc.). Even posters and flyers require space considerations, as they will need to be
displayed in a sufficiently prominent area to have a learning impact on personnel.
2.11. Communicating the Strategic Plan and Program Performance
One of the most important aspects of executing the CPLP strategic plan is collaborating with the
learning team, key stakeholders, senior leadership, and personnel. Involving stakeholders and
employees during the planning process can lead to greater success as the program begins and
as each program element is implemented. Determining what to communicate should focus on:
• How the CPLP helps meet organizational and learning goals
• How the CPLP elements will impact personnel
• Engaging with stakeholders to identify concerns or conflicts in advance
• Soliciting feedback to identify gaps or missing elements in the plan
• Supporting ongoing efforts to develop a cybersecurity and privacy culture
Obtaining early and continual support for the strategic plan is important to keep the
momentum for the CPLP strong and inspire engagement and satisfaction with the plan. A solid
communication strategy will address those needs. Consider whether the organization has a
centralized communications department or whether communications decisions will be made at
the business unit level. Then develop a communications plan (or incorporate these elements 
into an existing communications plan) to share information about the new or updated CPLP.
Keep it simple and tailored to internal stakeholders. The CPLP manager may choose to create a
custom version of the strategic plan that includes different information for different audiences.
Some important elements to share include information about what the CPLP is and who
manages it. Funding issues and gaps may also need to be identified and addressed. For
example, agency leaders and managers need to know whether the cost to implement the CPLP
activities will be funded by the CIO, CISO, CLO, or another program budget or whether their
budgets will be impacted to cover a portion of the expense. In addition, schedules and
completion requirements must be communicated.
The CPLP communications plan should include:
• An overview of the CPLP strategy and ownership
• Goals, objectives, and assessment processes
• A list of key roles and their respective responsibilities, including:
o Senior leadership and executives
o Managers and supervisors
o HR, Office of the CHCO, and labor relations
o Office of the Chief Financial Officer (CFO) or budget analyst
o CLO (agency or organization level)
o CPLP managers and team members
o SMEs
• Budget overview
• Key deliverables and high-level schedule
• Measurements and metrics
• Reporting methods and frequency
Everyone involved in the implementation of the program must understand their roles and
responsibilities. Most organizations may find it helpful to tailor their messaging based on the
audience. A few examples of audiences and their roles include:
• Senior leadership and executives (e.g., director, CIO, CISO, SAISO, SAOP, CAIO and CPO)
— Communications may include a high-level summary of the CPLP strategic plan,
including the goals for and phases of the year-long program. Senior leadership must
understand the overall program so that they can support the allocation of budget and
personnel. Ensure that senior leaders are provided with appropriate messaging so that
they can avoid harmful language (e.g., "users are the weakest link").
• Managers and supervisors — Communications should emphasize the benefit of building
a positive cybersecurity and privacy culture and help managers and supervisors 
recognize their crucial role in supporting that culture. Encourage positive associations
with allocating time for employee learning.
• HR, human capital officers, and labor relations officers — Those involved in HR or
human capital are responsible for any required communications regarding the
implementation of CPLP requirements into the onboarding and training of employees
and contractors throughout the year. For organizations with union members, labor
relations officers will also be key stakeholders in assisting with any updates to the plan
and receiving reports on learning outcomes and other metrics for their unionrepresented personnel. Human capital is also a crucial stakeholder to provide input
about personnel disciplinary actions and, if necessary, to initiate labor relations and
union negotiations with regard to the mandatory training or learning activities outlined
in the agency process.
• Chief Financial Officer (CFO) — The Office of the CFO (or the organization or agency
equivalent senior financial officer) is responsible for approving the CPLP and dispensing
funding to the CPLP manager and must, therefore, be kept informed about program
implementation and measurements.
• Chief Learning Officer (CLO) — The CLO is responsible for education in the organization
and may provide the learning infrastructure, such as the LMS or other distribution
platforms.
• Personnel — Create a communications strategy that allows for direct email messages to
personnel and a distributed system to their managers and supervisors. When creating
communications materials about the CPLP for individual contributors (e.g., materials in
the new hire orientation packages), focus efforts on enabling individual contributors to
see their part in the overall CPLP. This should include a schedule to ensure that users are
notified in sufficient time before they are required to complete the learning activity. 
3. CPLP Analysis and Design
While there are many theories and models for the design and development of training
programs, this document focuses on the ADDIE model — a traditional instructional systems
design model with five distinct phases:
1. Analysis
2. Design
3. Development
4. Implementation
5. Evaluation
During the analysis phase, the CPLP manager identifies the organizational and learning needs or
gaps to determine which audiences will need training and their existing levels of knowledge and
skill. It may be necessary to evaluate various work roles for competency gaps so that relevant
learning programs can be customized and created based on the specific learning and skill needs
for that work role. During the design phase, these gaps are translated into learning objectives,
which are the focus of the learning material. Tying the learning objectives to identified
knowledge and skills gaps ensures that the end result is relevant and will succeed in addressing
the identified learning needs.
3.1. Analysis Phase
The analysis phase is the process during which the CPLP manager determines the organization's
learning and performance needs. In this context, the needs (i.e., gaps) are the difference
between the current learning goals (or activities) and the desired state. To determine their
learning needs, organizations may conduct a formal or informal needs assessment (also
referred to as a needs analysis). The primary benefit of the analysis phase is to identify learning
needs for the organization and learning audience. Additional benefits include having
information that clearly defines the learning needs, support for and prioritization of resources,
and the alignment of learning goals to organizational mission goals.
In the beginning of the analysis phase, it may be helpful to identify the primary members of the
analysis team, including several additional constituent groups. This may include:
• Executive management — These organizational leaders need to understand the
relevant regulations, directives, laws, operational changes, or other requirements that
form the basis for the CPLP. It is important for leadership to provide input on
organizational learning needs since they set the expectations for the program and
learners. A key role for CPLP managers is to continually advocate for the program by
explaining why analysis is important and how an effective CPLP is part of effective risk
management. Additionally, an effective and well-designed CPLP supports the 
development of an organizational culture focused on cybersecurity and privacy
protections.
• Cybersecurity and privacy personnel — These individuals act as SMEs and consultants
for the organization. They identify and help document the knowledge and skills needed
to perform the tasks associated with work roles.
• System owners and program managers — These individuals will have information on
and responsibilities for the particular system in use by the organization. For example,
the owner of a system will recognize the potential impacts of learning activities on the
personnel tasked with operating that system.
• Learning program participants or learners — Representatives from the employee base
and different cybersecurity and privacy work roles can provide input on the
requirements gathering and analysis process.
3.1.1. Importance of the Analysis Phase
There are many reasons why the analysis phase is rushed or skipped entirely. For example,
organizations may think it will take too much time, personnel may be unavailable, or the
necessary funding may be lacking. Most often, organizations believe they already know what
they need. However, critical problems can arise by skipping the analysis phase, such as:
• Wasted spending when learning materials are developed that do not meet the required
knowledge or skills gaps.
• Misunderstanding the knowledge and skills gaps of the learners, which may require
personnel, technology, or other resources to remedy.
• Using training to solve an issue that is not a knowledge or skills gap (e.g., an employee is
unable to perform "additional as assigned" duties). Conducting an analysis will help
determine whether it is a systematic or structural gap rather than a knowledge or skills
gap.
• Providing the right personnel with the wrong information, such as giving privileged
access account holders only basic training rather than information specific to their
additional rights.
• Providing the wrong personnel with the right information, such as giving privileged
access account holder training to general users.
• Providing the right information through an ineffective medium or providing the wrong
information through an effective medium.
• Repeating the same learning material even if previous efforts have failed.
It may be tempting to skip the time needed to properly analyze the organization's needs. Even
if the only option is to conduct an informal discussion and review with a few individuals, it is
still important to have the conversation and document what is needed. The analysis phase
establishes a clear vision for the next steps of the CPLP's development.
3.1.2. Steps of the Analysis Phase
While there are many ways that CPLP managers can evaluate the learning needs of the
organization, the process for identifying learning program needs from a strategic point of view
tends to be a repeatable process, regardless of the specific learning goal or audience. The steps
are:
1. Identify learning needs based on the work role activities and tasks
2. Identify the learning program audience
3. Match the identified learning needs to each audience
4. Assess the audience's current knowledge and skill level
5. Determine the learning gaps
3.1.2.1. Identify Learning Needs
The most important step in initiating a new phase in the CPLP is to establish the learning needs.
For example, the organization may be prepared to introduce new technology, legislation may
have been passed that requires personnel to acquire new knowledge or skills, or a new privacy
or cybersecurity risk may have emerged that requires the organization to introduce a new
learning module. Identifying and prioritizing learning needs will allow the CPLP managers to
focus their attention on the issues of greatest importance to the organization.
The following techniques can help define the learning needs:
• Identify what knowledge or skills are needed in the organization through a learning
needs assessment.
• Review existing work or job analysis reports.
• Identify any regulatory or other requirements for learning programs.
• Review relevant cybersecurity or privacy risks for the participant audience. All
organizations face operational risks. While the majority of risk considerations focus on
responding to incidents that result in a failure to maintain cybersecurity, it is important
to include an effective learning plan as a mitigation factor for risks.
• Review lessons learned or after-action reports. After an incident, the CPLP manager may
be engaged in an effort to educate personnel on corrective best practices. This is an
important opportunity to learn from mistakes. New material should be developed that
not only speaks to the specifics of the incident but may be able to strengthen weak
areas around it, such as identifying and reporting vulnerabilities.
3.1.2.2. Identify the Learning Program Audience
During the analysis phase, the learning program manager will identify and define the audiences
to be trained on the learning goals. It may be helpful for supervisors to coordinate with the 
organization's cybersecurity and privacy learning function to determine whether personnel
need additional training.
Potential learning audiences for the CPLP include:
• New employees: This audience includes contractors, and the focus is usually on the
important policies and rules of behavior for the systems that they will access. This
training includes what is typically called "new employee orientation" or "onboarding"
and can be joint cybersecurity and privacy training. Some organizations may need to
require visitors and/or guests to sign acceptable use policies if they allow them any type
of system access, including use of wireless network connections.
• All users: This is also known as "general workforce training" and includes regularly
scheduled (often annual but preferably more frequent) cybersecurity and privacy
training for all system users, including personnel without access to the system. An
analysis of this audience's training requirements should include reviewing the
performance of previous program elements and any new organizational requirements.
• Privileged access account holders: These are personnel with additional responsibilities
who are trusted to perform cybersecurity- or privacy-relevant functions that ordinary
users are not authorized to perform. They will require additional training in order to be
provided with privileged access accounts. When identifying privileged access account
holders, consider:
o Whether new systems have been implemented or are planned and the rights
and privileges associated with privileged access accounts
o Whether the list of participants with system owners is complete and whether
new rights and privileges are required
o Whether any of these systems have been moved to the cloud and require new
training
• Staff with significant cybersecurity and/or privacy responsibilities training: Some
positions require role-based training for staff with significantly specialized
responsibilities. This type of training includes:
o Specialized or customized training on specific products, networks, systems,
applications, or information
o Work role tasks and activities, such as incident response procedures, oversight
responsibilities, or identity management
o Reskilling and upskilling programs
o Learning that helps the employee perform their work tasks
The following examples show how personnel can be assigned to multiple learning programs:
• Wilson is currently a system administrator, and as an employee of a federal agency, she
attends the annual CPLP training. She is also in the Information Technology department,
so she and her team receive additional training on cybersecurity and privacy. In her role
as a system administrator, she has significant cybersecurity and privacy responsibilities
and is therefore required to attend additional training.
• Ng is now part of the organization's web publishing team and has access rights to
publish the public-facing webpages of the organization. This carries significant agency
branding and communications responsibilities. Ng must take annual training and sign an
additional Acceptable Use Policy regarding appropriate publishing activities.
3.1.2.3. Match the Identified Learning Needs to Each Audience
The primary knowledge and skillset for the "all users" learning audience segment is the ability
to recognize cybersecurity and privacy risks, take appropriate actions to reduce harm to the
organization, and report any incidents or events, when appropriate. All users must be
empowered and skilled in adhering to the organization's rules of behavior and acceptable use
policies, which include guidance on how to use organization-provided devices and access
network resources.
Privileged access account holders must be able to judge risks appropriately and use systems
that they have been given access to without introducing additional risks or harm to the
organization. The NICE Framework [5] can be a useful resource for identifying the necessary
role-based knowledge and skills for those with significant cybersecurity or privacy
responsibilities. An organizational job analysis will also be useful in determining the learning
objectives for program participants. For those with significant privacy responsibilities, the CPLP
manager should consult with managers, SMEs, and the privacy senior leadership of the
organization (i.e., CPO or SAOP) for additional guidance on the knowledge and skills required of
individuals. There are existing models for evaluating the tasks necessary for a particular person's role, such
as considering the complexity or difficulty of the task, its importance, and how frequently the
task is performed. This is sometimes referred to as the "DIF model" for considering the relative
difficulty, importance, and frequency of the task. It can be helpful for identifying the knowledge
and skills that the CPLP should focus on when training those with significant cybersecurity or
privacy responsibilities.
3.1.2.4. Assess the Audience's Current Knowledge and Skill Level
The next step in the analysis phase is to determine what the audience segment already knows
about the topic and what skills they possess while keeping the learning goal in mind. The CPLP
should focus on providing the learner with the requisite amount of new knowledge and skills 
while reinforcing existing knowledge and skills. There are several methods for determining the
existing knowledge and skill set:
• Hold guided conversations and interviews with SMEs, managers, system owners, and
other organizational personnel with relevant mission or business functions
• Review recent job task analyses
• Analyze events and related responses that may indicate skill levels
• Conduct performance-based assessments to evaluate and validate capabilities
• Conduct training with the existing CPLP program elements to establish baseline metrics
These methods can also identify whether new training is needed for a role or whether existing
training needs to be updated or modified.
3.1.2.5. Determine the Learning Gaps
Thus far, the analysis measures personnel's existing knowledge and skills with an overview of
each audience segment. The difference between that and the ideal state of knowledge and
skills for the learning goal is referred to as "the learning gap." During the design phase, the CPLP
manager will use information about each learning gap (per learning goal, learning audience,
etc.) to design a program specific enough to address each need.
3.2. Design Phase
At the beginning of the design phase, consider what knowledge and skills the audience needs to
learn or develop and what gaps the learning material will close. This will drive the creation of
the learning objectives and the process for achieving them. The design process should end with
a systematic blueprint of the approach needed for the CPLP to address the identified
knowledge and skills gaps.
3.2.1. Steps of the Design Phase
The CPLP manager begins a formal design phase for the CPLP or a new element in an ongoing
CPLP by creating a Design Document that outlines the requirements. Then it will be necessary
to determine whether they need to build or buy learning materials to satisfy those
requirements. The steps in the design phase are:
1. Create a Design Document
2. Conduct a survey of available training, both internal and external
3. Identify learning objectives
4. Summarize CPLP or element requirements
3.2.1.1. Creating a Design Document
The Design Document provides a blueprint for the development and implementation of the
learning program elements. It is usually created by the CPLP manager and reviewed by key
stakeholders (when necessary for funding and other approvals) before moving to the
development phase.
Typical elements of a Design Document include:
• Purpose, goals, and background
• Intended audience
• Learning objectives
• Content and available training survey (e.g., build or buy)
• A course outline, including high-level topics (e.g., number of lessons or modules and
their length)
• An instructional strategy that includes media (e.g., audio, video, demonstrations,
emulations, simulations), activities, and exercises
• Delivery medium (i.e., the learning environment — online, in a classroom, etc.)
• Types of assessments (e.g., participation, quiz with passing grade, performance-based
skill assessment, etc.)
• Required measurements and metrics
• Signature page to document acceptance from the key stakeholders
Based on its resources, the organization will determine whether it can build, have built, or
utilize existing government or commercial-off-the-shelf (COTS) learning content, which is
discussed further in Sec. 4.
3.2.1.2. Conducting a Survey of Available Training
CPLP managers will need to determine what training materials have previously been used in
their organization and are still available and appropriate for use. Additionally, there may be
materials and programs available from elsewhere in the organization, agency, or partner
agencies. Federal resources may have materials, presentations, and even speakers available to
satisfy a variety of learning goals. An important result of the survey effort will be insight into
what is currently being done to meet learning requirements in the organization and the gap in
needed program materials. The content should be adaptable to fit the learning program
participants' needs and the organizational context with reasonable effort or costs. 
3.2.1.2.1. External Sources of CPLP Materials
There is a variety of external sources of CPLP materials available. Some possible sources
include:
• Vendors: If the organization decides to outsource some or all of its CPLP course
development, a number of vendors in the private sector offer COTS courses that are
suitable for particular audiences or that can be developed for specific audiences. Prior
to selecting a vendor, agencies should fully understand their CPLP needs, be able to
determine whether a prospective vendor's material meets those needs, and consider
who "owns" the material for the purposes of future updates and adaptations. The
agency contracting officer will help ensure that organizational guidelines are met.
• Non-profit organizations and grant-based agreements: Federal organizations may have
agreements with non-profit organizations, grants to universities, or other similar
arrangements for the creation of educational materials on cybersecurity or privacy
topics. CPLP managers should be aware of any such opportunities and leverage these
materials.
• Other organizations: Organizations can explore CPLP materials that have been
developed by other organizations and edit them to fit their needs rather than creating a
completely new course. Care should be taken that the available material is applicable to
the intended audience and addresses the learning goals of the organization.
• Shared events and materials: Federal agencies may offer cybersecurity and privacy
learning events that are open to personnel across the Government. CPLP managers
should join federal working groups (e.g. Federal Information Security Educators or
FISSEA) to remain informed about events, workshops, and conferences intended for
professional development.
Sources of timely material may include:
• Email advisories issued by industry-hosted news groups, academic institutions, or the
organization's cybersecurity or privacy office
• Cybersecurity or privacy websites
• Themed events, such as Data Privacy Week, Cybersecurity Awareness Month, or
Cybersecurity Career Week
• Conferences, seminars, webinars, forums, and courses
3.2.1.2.2. Internal Sources of CPLP Materials
CPLP managers can build new partnerships or reinforce existing ones with the organization's
functional managers who coordinate or conduct their own learning programs. Functional
training developed in-house (e.g., financial applications or personnel management) often lacks
adequate discussion of related cybersecurity and privacy issues. Through these crossdepartmental partnerships, CPLP managers can review existing references to topic areas in the
materials, check for completeness and accuracy, and assist the functional manager by
developing a learning module for any material that previously had no cybersecurity or privacy
component.
3.2.1.3. Identifying Learning Objectives: From Analysis to Design
CPLP managers consolidate what they have found in available materials to identify the learning
objectives for the CPLP. Whether the CPLP manager is working on the entire plan, designing a
few new elements, or updating existing elements, this stage can be very useful in ensuring that
the effort is closely aligned with identified organizational needs.
3.2.1.3.1. Examples of Identifying Learning Objectives
Consider the following examples of identified training gaps and their associated learning
objectives.
Scenario 1: A recent analysis indicated that on-site, remote, and teleworking employees —
including employees with privileged access accounts — are using single-factor authentication
(i.e., a password). The CIO has approved the implementation of a multi-factor authentication
token system starting with privileged access accounts in the first quarter and all other accounts
in the second quarter. The CPLP manager has been tasked with helping employees understand
their roles in utilizing this new multi-factor authentication system.
Analysis Phase: Identify Knowledge and Skills Gaps
Since this is a new authentication method, the "all users" and privileged access account
holders learning audience segments need information and training on the new policies,
processes, and procedures for accessing the system. In addition, they need to know why
this effort is important or how it protects the information and assets on enterprise
systems. Privileged access account holders will also need additional information focused
on the specific privileges they will have once authenticated to the system.
Design Phase: Create Learning Objectives Based on Knowledge and Skills Gaps
The learning goals and objectives for the program must then be established. In this
example, the goals and objectives for the learning program involve enabling employees
to:
• Understand the vulnerabilities associated with using single-factor authentication
(e.g., user ID and password)
• Understand why the organization is adopting a multi-factor authentication token
method
• Identify their role in using multi-factor authentication
• Install the authentication application and verify that the token is received
• Utilize the token 100 % of the time for authentication to the system
Scenario 2: A recent external audit of the organization's system privacy policies and practices
found that the financial office employees were not adequately protecting the privacy of
employee bank information when processing the employees' travel costs.
Analysis Phase: Identify Knowledge and Skills Gaps
During the analysis phase, the learning program manager determined that financial
office employees are designated as employees with significant cybersecurity and privacy
responsibilities and receive an annual one-hour self-paced training course. Based on the
analysis, it was determined that the financial office employees lacked a basic
understanding of the policies and procedures for protecting sensitive and privacyrelated information. Since this could have immediate and damaging consequences, this
lack of knowledge will be addressed with a customized training solution delivered
immediately and by including the topic in updates to the annual one-hour self-paced
training course.
Design Phase: Create Learning Objectives Based on Knowledge and Skills Gaps
A webinar was scheduled with the financial office employees to provide immediate
direction on corrective actions for the protection of sensitive employee bank
information. The learning goals and objectives are:
• To be able to describe what is considered sensitive or personally identifiable
information, including bank information
• To be able to describe the policies and procedures for protecting sensitive and
personally identifiable information
• To be able to adequately protect information while in use and while it is stored
on the system when given an online form that contains privacy-related
information
3.2.1.4. Summarizing CPLP or Element Requirements
Before moving to the development phase, the CPLP manager must consolidate the
requirements for development using the results of the analysis and design phases. It should be
possible to fully articulate the competency gaps being targeted by the learning program
participant segment and the related learning objectives.
The following CPLP requirements are also important to consider:
• Material should accommodate all learning styles (e.g., online, in-person, repeatable,
recorded) and work for different audience types and sizes.
• Program elements should meet accessibility standards.
• Content should be updated and maintained to stay current.
• The diversity of the workforce should be recognized and supported.
• Learning objectives should be provided for any learning element or learning material.
• Learning objectives should be established in accordance with the organizational mission.
• A separate section should be dedicated to each learning objective, and individual
lessons for each of the learning objectives should be created.
• Visual elements (e.g., graphics, videos, tables, and other visual tools) should be
integrated to reinforce important concepts.
• Interactions should engage the audience and promote their ability to transfer content
from the training environment to the workplace.
• Managers and supervisors should be able to check progress, run reports, and access the
LMS.
• Required reporting needs for executive leadership should be supported.
• The IT and help desk staff should receive training to support the CPLP.
• If using outsourced courses, vendors should be supported and be able to update the
reporting and LMS platforms.
4. CPLP Development and Implementation
In the development phase, each audience's requirements are evaluated, budgeted, and
provided for separately. The previously identified audience requirements and learning
objectives are the guiding factors for developing the content. Some organizations may have
existing and mature awareness, training, and education programs that can provide content or
influence the development and implementation phases. Established best practices and lessons
learned should be considered when developing the learning content.
The development process will involve various personnel, including:
• Management: All levels of management will be responsible for their staff learning
needs, the prioritization of training resources, the identification of training gaps, and
evaluation of the training's effectiveness.
• Cybersecurity and privacy specialists and SMEs: Specialists and SMEs help determine
the task, knowledge, and skill requirements of the roles or job functions; identify
training gaps and needs within the organization; and guide the development and review
of learning materials.
• Training professionals: Training professionals acquire, customize, develop, present, and
evaluate the training content and training programs. Whether the training team and
cybersecurity and privacy teams are in the same department or not, the groups will
work closely with other SMEs to ensure that the material and programs are relevant and
accurate.
• Acquisitions and budget: These departments will be engaged when circumstances and
needs require the development or acquisition of externally sourced services or content.
Once the baseline requirements of the program have been solidified, a feedback strategy can
be designed and implemented to ensure that materials continue to support the CPLP strategy
and address identified training needs.
4.1. Developing CPLP Materials
After the CPLP managers complete their analysis and design reviews, they will have a
comprehensive set of design documents to guide the development of new materials. These
documents are useful when allocating budgets and personnel for the creation of new materials
or program elements. However, additional information will be needed to guide the content
creators in their work.
4.1.1. General Guidelines for Developing or Acquiring New CPLP Materials
The CPLP manager will need to create a requirements document if it is necessary to create or
source new CPLP content, curricula, or other program elements. The requirements document
incorporates the information from the design document as well as any additional and necessary
information to provide to the training and curricula developers, editors, and designers, whether 
they are in-house or vendors. The requirements document will also be useful for the
organization's acquisition and budget functions.
The requirements document generally provides detailed and specific criteria related to the
content needed to meet the learning objectives. Typical prompts or questions to review when
creating the requirements document for any new CPLP material include:
• For which learning program audience segments is the new element intended for?
• What specific cybersecurity or privacy risks and behaviors does the organization seek to
address?
• What knowledge or skills should the learner acquire or improve as a result of the CPLP
element?
• Does the material contribute to a positive cybersecurity and privacy culture that
reinforces the role of all users in reducing organizational risk?
• Will the material engage personnel?
• What are the budget requirements, restrictions, and timing?
• Who in the organization will review content development and approvals?
• What sort of user testing will be conducted to ensure that the content is appropriate for
the learning program participant segment, meets their needs, and is appropriate for
their skill level?
• Have the measurements and metrics been included to ensure that the learning program
will provide the needed data to improve the next version of the content?
The learning program criteria for the requirements document may include the following
considerations:
• Content is topical, relevant, and not quickly dated.
• Content is delivered in formats that support on-site and remote employees, contractors,
and guests.
• Content is delivered in appropriate formats for those using adaptive technology (e.g.,
screen readers).
• Learning material includes qualitative and quantitative assessments and evaluations to
measure the learning objectives and outcomes and is aligned to the defined
measurements and metrics.
• Learning material is specific to the learning program participant (i.e., audience)
segments for which it is intended.
4.1.2. Developing New Materials for the "All User" Learning Program
The "all user" learning program elements (see Sec. 2.5.1) are delivered throughout the year.
However, there may be necessary updates to, and iterations of the content based on events
and organizational requirements. Ensure that the budget is allocated to update the content or
amend the materials with other delivery methods (e.g., to video training) if making actual
content changes is cost prohibitive.
Developing a dynamic and effective "all user" learning program — and particularly, the
cybersecurity and privacy presentation — is challenging, especially when learners arrive with an
expectation that they only need to do the bare minimum to fulfill their training requirement.
However, given the ever-changing nature of cybersecurity and privacy risks, there will almost
always be new and crucial content for them to understand.
Consider how key messages will be reinforced throughout the "all user" learning program.
When necessary, refresher messages may be sent to reinforce a change in behaviors. For
example, if the results of a phishing campaign show higher than usual click-through rates, it
may be necessary to repeat the campaign using different mediums to ensure that the audience
is aware of expected behaviors on the system. Repeated messages become retained messages.
Use the awareness program materials to keep the "all user" learning program topical without
becoming monotonous or intrusive. This is a tricky balance to achieve and requires a variety of
delivery formats and messages. Consider varying the awareness program techniques, such as
sending out cybersecurity or privacy topic emails on a monthly basis, adding a campaign
message to everyone's official organization signature block for Cybersecurity Awareness Month
in October or Data Privacy Week in January, or place posters in the agency's lunchroom all year
round.
Choosing techniques for disseminating cybersecurity and privacy awareness messages
throughout an organization depends on available resources and the complexity of the
messages. Some techniques that are appropriate for a single message include posters,
screensavers, warning banners, organization-wide emails, brown bag seminars, and awards
programs. Techniques that can more easily include several messages or themes include "do and
don't" lists, email newsletters, web-based sessions, teleconferencing sessions, in-person
instructor-led sessions, and email signature messaging. Examples of awareness material can be
viewed on the Federal Information Security Educators (FISSEA) website under "FISSEA
Security Awareness and Training Contest."
Additional considerations when developing the "all user" learning program include:
• What does the organization want all personnel to be aware of regarding cybersecurity
and privacy? Starting points may include a review of the latest top risks to the
organization, as reported by the cybersecurity or privacy office; common risks reported
by cybersecurity and privacy organizations; and new mission goals with cybersecurity or
privacy implications. Evaluating organizational policies, program reviews, internal audits,
self-assessments, and spot-checks can also help learning program managers identify
additional topics to address.
• Were constraints found in the analysis phase? For example, does the organization have
particular issues with delivering a learning program to personnel? Will personnel be able
to access or attend training by a particular required date to achieve completion? Are
some personnel working remotely, traveling, located overseas, or in need of reasonable
accommodations? Consider what additional steps will be needed to ensure that all
personnel can participate in the "all user" learning program and fulfill their learning
program obligations.
• Popular topics for learning programs for this participant segment may include: social
engineering exploits (e.g., phishing, spear phishing, vishing, smishing); password policy
and management; multi-factor authentication; changing default passwords (e.g., on
routers and IOT devices); remote and work-from-home cybersecurity and privacy
considerations; cybersecurity when traveling; email security; malware, including
ransomware and how to respond; shoulder surfing and insider threat considerations;
back-up policy and management; cloud services; and computer, phone, and data
disposal policies.
4.1.3. Developing New Materials for the Privileged Access Account Holders Learning Program
Developing new materials or elements for privileged access account holders is similar to
developing them for the "all users" segment. Create a requirements document that aligns
learning goals for this audience segment with available funding and organizational
requirements.
Additional considerations for developing new material for the privileged access account holders
learning program include:
• What should privileged access account holders be aware of regarding cybersecurity and
privacy?
• What procedures do personnel need to follow to protect their privileged access
accounts?
Some starting points include: understanding the rights and privileges allotted to this learning
program audience segment; reviewing the risks related to privileged access accounts or the
systems or applications associated with privileged access; reviewing these issues with the
offices of the CIO, CISO, and/or CPO; and aligning learning goals for these risks to the available
budget for impacted personnel and departments. Evaluating organizational policies, program
reviews, internal audits, self-assessments, and spot-checks can also help CPLP managers
identify additional topics to address.
4.1.4. Developing New Materials for Those With Significant Cybersecurity and/or Privacy
Responsibilities
The customized and individualized nature of ongoing skills development and training for
personnel with significant cybersecurity and/or privacy responsibilities requires a more detailed
and nuanced learning program approach. For example, multiple requirements documents may
be needed to develop new learning program elements and identify training that will satisfy
learning objectives. The CPLP manager should partner and coordinate these efforts with the
organization's human capital office, CLO, training and curriculum developers, and the individual
managers and supervisors for the personnel in this learning program audience segment.
CPLP managers should ensure that the complexity of the training is commensurate with the
role and needs of the people who will undergo the learning effort. Cybersecurity and privacy
role-based training materials can be developed at a beginning level for a person who is just
learning a discipline. Materials can be developed at an intermediate level for someone who has
more experience and, therefore, more responsibility in their workplace. Advanced materials
can be developed for agency SMEs whose jobs incorporate the highest level of trust and an
accompanying high level of cybersecurity or privacy responsibilities.
4.1.5. Acquiring Learning Materials From External Sources
CPLP managers should evaluate available materials from a variety of external sources, including
federal programs and repositories, industry vendors, and academic institutions. Some of these
courses or learning elements may be low cost or even free.
Where budget permits, CPLP managers may choose to acquire (or license) a vendor-provided
library of courses and align, curate, and recommend a set of those courses for the learning
program audiences or certain work roles. Acquisitions of CPLP materials should be guided by
the same learning criteria identified for the creation of new elements (see Sec. 3.3.1). CPLP
managers should also consult with their organization's agency contracting office.
4.1.6. Conducting Learner Testing on New CPLP Elements
Include a learner testing ("user testing") phase for all new CPLP elements prior to
implementation. Content should be assessed for each learning program audience segment to
ensure that it meets their needs and is appropriate for their skill level. Additional learner testing
might include evaluating the intended element's delivery method, the appropriateness of the
language, the value to the learner, and overall acceptance of the new element. Feedback from
learner testing should be iterative and incorporated at every step of the design effort, not just
in the form of evaluations after implementation.
4.2. Implementing New CPLP Elements
Implementation refers to the actual distribution and delivery of the CPLP materials. This phase
focuses on the connection between the learner and the content. Once the plan for 
implementing the CPLP has been communicated to and accepted by management (see Sec.
2.11), the implementation phase can begin. Use a life cycle process when implementing the
program to avoid a "one and done" scenario, and periodically review the program for updates
and corrections.
4.2.1. Steps for Implementing a New CPLP Element
CPLP managers should implement a new learning program or a single element with the same
repeatable steps. It is of the utmost importance that all of those involved in the
implementation phase be included in a well-designed communications effort. This ensures that
personnel and their managers or supervisors are well-informed about any upcoming CPLP
opportunities that are relevant to their required learning plans. The implementation phase is
also the time to confirm that the required reporting and metrics can be satisfied in later
program phases. Steps to consider before initiating the implementation phase include:
1. Communicating the CPLP implementation
2. Measuring success by establishing measurement, metric, and reporting requirements
3. Building a CPLP schedule
4. Planning to evaluate program success by reviewing post-implementation
feedback, measurements, and metrics
4.3. Communicating the CPLP Implementation
Communication is a large part of developing an organization's shared culture of supporting the
learning program efforts. CPLP managers should develop a communications plan for each phase
of the program element implementation and include the organization's communications team.
CPLP managers should also determine the appropriate timing to inform managers, supervisors,
and possibly the personnel involved about upcoming and required learning program elements,
as well as the frequency with which to send out reminders and other forms of communication
that encourage cooperation from the organization.
Each individual CPLP element (e.g., presentation, course, or tabletop exercise) requires a
separate and more detailed form of communication to inform learners and their managers of
important details regarding the learning event. This includes items such as:
• Titles, descriptions, purpose of the training or learning activity (including prerequisites),
learning goals, objectives, and learner outcomes
• Participating learning program audience segments (if not all users)
• Tracking method (and completion tracking), including consequences of not completing
the learning, especially for self-paced content (by deadline or at all)
• Delivery method (e.g., in person, virtual delivery, self-directed online learning, etc.)
• Required, recommended, or requested accommodations
• Schedule considerations, such as registration timelines, availability dates, or due dates
• Verification of learners with significant cybersecurity or privacy responsibilities
The communications plan should include a clear explanation of why the learning program is
mandated (if applicable) and the benefits of attending (i.e., the learner outcomes). Applicable
federal legislation, regulations, and agency or organizational policies should be referenced.
Each learner audience must be specified for the training assigned. For example, if the
organization's policy states that all system users must complete a particular training to gain or
maintain access to enterprise systems, the communications plan must include this notice. For
those with significant cybersecurity or privacy responsibilities, identify which training is
assigned to a specific work role, individual, or department.
Employees must know the consequences of failing to complete the learning activity according
to the organization's policy. This should be explained in the learning program communications
plan and noted in the course description in the learning plan within the LMS.
Other considerations for CPLP communications include:
• Course titles and numbers should be unique, differentiated, and include information on
the access method (e.g., online or in-person), availability, course dates, and deadlines.
• All learners, their managers or supervisors, and human capital departments should be
informed of any required training and associated due dates. Communication should
include reminder messages, references and links to the organization's official policy
statements for employee information systems, and the consequences of failing to
complete the learning activity.
4.4. Establishing Measurements, Metrics, and Reporting
As noted in Sec. 2.4, CPLP managers should strive to ensure that the implementation of all new
CPLP elements (e.g., courses, training, posters, practical exercises, etc.) will allow for
performance metrics and measurements to be established and collected. Review these
requirements during the developmental phase to ensure that the measurements still meet
expectations, such as regulatory and annual reporting requirements, learning objectives, and
learner outcomes. The goal is not simply to meet compliance requirements but to enable an
ongoing development effort for the CPLP. As previously mentioned in Sec. 3.2.2, the
measurements and metrics are included in the design plan requirements used by curriculum
and content developers.
Some considerations for reporting measurements and metrics include:
• LMS integration: Any automated LMS used should provide the capabilities to track all
necessary measures, such as training registration, attendance, and completion.
• Non-LMS integrated elements: Consider how the participation and performance of each
learner will be tracked and recorded if the training is face-to-face, virtual, or hybrid (e.g.,
manual or paper tracking).
• Consider metrics for how the CPLP element contributes to a positive cybersecurity and
privacy culture and improves behavior.
As a final step, the CPLP manager will meet with the Senior Leadership Committee to review
the performance of the program, address new organizational risks or concerns to include in the
training program content, and identify any areas for significant improvement. Section 5
provides more information on how measurements and metrics help to ensure that the CPLP life
cycle is an ongoing and continual effort.
4.5. Building a CPLP Schedule
Establish a primary calendar for CPLP activities, which may be automated using an LMS. Enable
organization-wide access so that personnel can find elements that are applicable to each
audience segment (e.g., by date, learning objective, etc.). Align this calendar with organizational
availability, such as observed holidays, planned events, major IT releases, and other
considerations that might cause learner conflicts with the CPLP schedule. As part of the
communications plan, send out reminders to ensure that instructors and materials are
identified and allocated well in advance.
4.6. Planning to Evaluate Program Success
Once any CPLP element has been delivered or implemented, the CPLP manager should initiate
post-implementation activities that fuel assessment and improvements. Some awareness
elements, such as measuring learning program participant engagement, may be difficult,
especially for passive items like posters or email signatures. Nevertheless, it is possible to
measure impact. One method could include surveying a sample of learners to discuss their
familiarity with the messaging or whether they have practiced any of the tips.
Some key items to consider during the implementation phase are:
• Sending post-training feedback surveys
• Conducting instructor feedback surveys
• Determining attendance and completion rates by learner or department
• Other mandated or organizational reporting
• Budget reconciliation
• Consolidating all CPLP feedback surveys, metrics, and other reports to prepare materials
for assessment and improvement
5. CPLP Assessment and Improvement
An effective CPLP meets the needs of learners and the organization by measuring and
evaluating program performance on a continual basis. This process requires up-to-date
knowledge, awareness, and understanding of the legal and regulatory compliance requirements
for the organization and cybersecurity and privacy risks. CPLP managers work with
organizational leaders, training staff, and learners to share performance reporting and decision-making throughout all phases of the CPLP. Analyzing organizational risks (e.g., decrease in the
number and frequency of common issues that the learning program has targeted over time)
and reviewing the efficacy of materials (e.g., learner feedback responses to courses) are
important in the continual improvement of a CPLP in an evolving threat landscape. Remember
to choose measurements that can be quantified, such as SMART goals (i.e., specific,
measurable, achievable, relevant, and time-bound).
5.1 Steps for Assessing and Improving the CPLP
The process for assessing and improving the CPLP may vary by organization and available
resources. Consider the following steps as part of evaluating the CPLP's performance, whether
for the entire CPLP, for each audience segment, or for a single CPLP element.
• Create a CPLP assessment report:
o Analyze measurements and metrics.
o Review regulatory compliance and reporting.
o Evaluate CPLP effectiveness through feedback.
• Review the CPLP assessment report with senior leadership:
o Agree on the changes needed for the CPLP.
o Evaluate budget requirements for program improvement.
• Make CPLP improvement efforts:
o Review and update the CPLP strategic and operational plans.
o Implement changes into the next revisions of the program elements and schedule.
5.2 Creating a CPLP Assessment Report
At the end of a campaign and regularly throughout the year as agreed upon with the Senior
Leadership Committee, CPLP managers should create a summary document to review with
senior leadership. This report will provide an analysis of attendance, feedback, measurements,
and other metrics and help to identify action items, areas of improvement, and next steps. It
should be tailored for senior leadership using appropriate language and framing (e.g., avoid
using technical jargon without explanation). 
A CPLP assessment report includes:
• Measurements and metrics (Sec. 5.2.1)
• Regulatory compliance information (Sec. 5.2.2)
• Evaluation of CPLP effectiveness (Sec. 5.2.3)
o Instructor evaluation (Sec. 5.2.3.1)
o Content evaluation (Sec. 5.2.3.2)
o Learner, supervisor, and organizational feedback (Sec. 5.2.3.3)
5.2.1 Measurements and Metrics
Measurements and metrics are the key drivers for the assessment and improvement phase of
the CPLP life cycle. The process of developing and establishing CPLP measurements requires
careful consideration and should be driven by the program goals and objectives, as well as any
regulatory requirements.
How the organization defines and collects its measurements will lead to the definition and
analysis of its metrics. Metrics monitor the accomplishment of the program goals and
objectives by quantifying the level of implementation, effectiveness, and efficiency of the
program while identifying possible improvements. An effective set of metrics can help improve
content quality and learner engagement, obtain support from the organization, increase
funding, reveal impacts on the cybersecurity and privacy risk management program, and
demonstrate returns on investment. Include results from both quantitative and qualitative
measurement instruments.
5.2.2 Regulatory Compliance Reporting
CPLP managers should be aware of and prepared to participate in all CPLP-related compliance
regulations for the organization, including reporting requirements. In some organizations,
compliance reporting may be handled by an assigned single individual or group. For those
organizations in which the duties are separated, it is critical to maintain collaborative
communication to ensure that the program meets compliance.
A fully developed and integrated CPLP may become a useful tool for supporting enterprise risk
management, although many are initially developed to address compliance requirements in
laws, regulations, policies, or standards. Meeting these compliance obligations is often the
primary focus of higher level leadership but should only be the starting point for a robust CPLP
program. Examples of common quantifiable metrics to demonstrate CPLP compliance include
training a certain percentage of the workforce and the results of practical exercises.
Organizations should determine which compliance measurements they must achieve and
consider those inputs when developing the CPLP.
CPLP managers should work with policy owners to determine the methods that the CPLP will
use to meet reporting needs and ensure that the results of the learning efforts satisfy
compliance requirements. Examples of questions to ask to help identify those needs include:
• Which personnel received (or participated in) the learning element?
• How well does the participation level match the goal of learning program participant
segment coverage?
• How far should the CPLP go in pursuit of expected coverage?
• Have individuals in compliance-identified roles met their learning requirements?
5.2.3 Evaluating CPLP Effectiveness
CPLP managers should periodically evaluate the overall effectiveness of the CPLP and report the
results to leadership to encourage continued support for the program. At this step of the
program life cycle, the application of metrics and measurements (see Sec. 2.4) should be
documented.
In addition to ensuring compliance with regulatory requirements, the program itself needs to
be able to meet its own goals. Two major components of the program to measure and assess
are the instructors and the content. CPLP managers should review the performance of
instructors to ensure that the material is delivered effectively. The success of the content can
then be determined by incorporating feedback from instructors, students, and leadership. The
following subsections describe measurements and metrics needs for assessment and
evaluation.
5.2.3.1. Instructor Evaluation
The instructor is responsible for creating an environment in which learning can take place by
facilitating discussions, providing knowledge and expertise, and motivating and inspiring the
participants to learn new skills. An instructor evaluation includes both an assessment of the
instructor and feedback from what the instructor observed or experienced.
CPLP managers and the Senior Leadership Committee work together to find the right
instructors for their personnel and their CPLP's learning objectives by determining whether
organizational resources can support a dedicated in-house team of instructors or external
resources are needed to implement instructor-led learning content. In some organizations, the
cybersecurity learning program manager is also the privacy learning program manager and the
lead instructor.
Since instructors are a key factor in creating a supportive and effective learning environment, it
is important to monitor the performance of instructors via observation and other forms of
feedback. Some effective instructor qualities include how well the instructor communicates the
material and key concepts for the audience level, engages with learners in a positive and
respectful manner, encourages active participation, uses interactive teaching methods, and
responds to learner questions and concerns. 
Instructor feedback can be obtained via the learner's course feedback, as well as from direct
annual observations of the instructor. Some tips for providing learner feedback are:
• Allow learners to submit anonymous feedback to encourage constructive reviews.
• Ask learners specific questions about the instructor's teaching methods, knowledge of
the subject, and classroom management.
• Provide the feedback to the instructor in summary form so that individuals are not
inadvertently identified.
Some tips for instructor observations are:
• Include direct observations of the instructors using experienced instructional designers
or supervisors who can provide insights into teaching styles, class management, and
engagement with learners.
• Include peer observations from other instructors as an informal feedback mechanism.
• Tell instructors when observers will be there and allow them to be prepared.
It is important to create a fair and supportive instructor evaluation process to ensure that
learning goals are achieved and there is continuous improvement. Combining multiple
evaluation methods and a transparent process provides a solid foundation for constructive
evaluation. Most importantly, instructors will know that they are appreciated for their
important role in the learning program.
5.2.3.2. Content Evaluation
Instructors also provide important feedback on the learning material and how it was received
by the learners. CPLP managers should work with instructors to review their comments and
observations and, when necessary, support the adjustment of material for greater
effectiveness. Instructors can provide feedback on:
• Perceived accuracy
• Ease of instruction and learner understanding
• Adequacy of materials to support content
• Relevance and timeliness of materials
5.2.3.3. Learner, Supervisor, and Organizational Evaluation and Feedback
Considering multiple types of feedback can help CPLP managers develop a thorough
understanding of what is working and where improvement is needed in a CPLP. Feedback
mechanisms can be used to evaluate learners' reactions, learnings, behaviors, and results —
the four levels of learner impact in the Kirkpatrick Model [15], as shown in Table 3. 
Level 1 is sometimes referred to as the "smile sheet" because a simple questionnaire with
visual prompts for ratings can be used to ask the learner for their immediate thoughts on the
learning program. The results from Level 1 reactions can be used to assess the immediate
impact of the learning program element.
Level 1 reaction measurements are influenced by:
• Overall perceived level of engagement and effectiveness of the training program
• Use of interactive mechanisms throughout the training, such as poll questions,
interactive discussions, and individual or small group activities
• Use of end-of-course survey questions or other types of debrief sessions to assess
learner satisfaction and their perceptions of the learning element and the learning
program. Examples of questions to ask at the conclusion of the learning program
element are:
o Was the learning program element relevant to your work role?
o How satisfied are you with the content, delivery mechanism (e.g., online
platform, facility, or instructor), level of engagement, length of time, and depth
of the material?
o Was the learning program element worth your time?
o What are the three most important things you learned from the learning
program element?
o What additional information or other topics would be helpful to you?
o What is your overall impression of the learning program?
Level 2 evaluates how well the participant absorbed the learning content and acquired new
knowledge based on the learner outcomes, which are written in a format that is measurable,
achievable, and outcome-based. One of the most common techniques for measuring learner
performance is an end-of-course assessment, though there are other innovative and engaging
techniques that should be considered and utilized. 
Level 2 learning best practices include:
• Written questions or practical activities developed at a level commensurate with both
the complexity of the material and the level of understanding expected of the learner
• Clear learning objectives and learner outcomes as well as assessments that align with
the learning objectives and content
• Practical assessments that allow for the demonstration of knowledge and skill
development and that mimic what will be experienced in the work role
• Use of various assessment methods, such as case studies, interactive virtual cyber labs,
demonstrations, and scenario-based exercises
Level 3 considers whether the learner was able to apply new knowledge or skills to their work
responsibilities and duties. Obtaining feedback depends largely on asking questions of learners,
their peers, or their supervisor.
Level 3 behavior best practices include:
• Questions that help identify gaps in the learning program materials and may indicate
the need to reinforce those materials
• Questions that help identify gaps in the organizational structure that limit the learner's
ability to apply the new knowledge and skills
• Examples of questions for learners may include:
o How have you utilized the knowledge gained from the learning program in the
workplace? How has your approach to [job activity] changed after attending the
learning program? Describe a situation at work in which you were able to apply
your new knowledge or skills.
o What additional learning content support or reinforcement or job aid would help
you utilize new knowledge and skills in the workplace?
o Was the cybersecurity lab activity on troubleshooting rogue IP addresses
adequate to help you do this activity on the job? In what ways, if any, was the
small group activity on identifying roles and responsibilities helpful for your
workplace?
• Examples of questions for peers or supervisors may include:
o In what ways, if any, have you observed or noticed changes in the learner's [job
activity] since they attended the learning program. Have you observed the
learner sharing their new knowledge or skills with others?
o What new processes or procedures need to be included in the learning
materials, if any? What new focus areas or changes in the workplace, if any,
need to be included in the learning materials?
o How could job aids, awareness materials, or learning support help reinforce the
new knowledge or skills? 
• Follow-up questions are usually asked three to six months after the learning activity so
that enough time has passed for the learner to integrate the learning material into their
work responsibilities and duties.
Level 4 feedback determines the impact that the learning program had on the organization,
sometimes referred to as a return on investment (ROI). CPLP managers analyze the results of
the activity from an enterprise-wide perspective. For example, the organization may decide to
implement a new technology, such as artificial intelligence (AI), in its business processes.
Training provides the policies and procedures for how the learner can use AI technologies in
their work role. The program requires learners to attend the training but also requires
supervisor approval and justification for its use. The organization must then determine whether
the training on policies and procedures or supervisory control produced the results. To utilize
this assessment method correctly, the requirements, objectives, overall outcomes, and metrics
must be clearly defined.
Learning objectives and learner outcomes should be aligned with the organization's strategic
and business objectives and goals during the design process. An organizational goal aligned to
learning objectives should be quantifiable and detailed (e.g., "SMART" goals). An example of
aligning an organizational goal, learning goals, learner outcomes, and organizational results is:
• Organizational goal: When notified, staff will be able to mitigate all known exploited
vulnerabilities within 48 hours following organizational processes.
o A metric to determine whether the organizational goal is achieved is a trend
analysis of time needed by staff to mitigate known exploited vulnerabilities.
Establish a baseline before the learning program, and track changes following
the learning program.
• Learning goals: Participants can track known exploited vulnerabilities, discover impacts
to the organization, analyze and document indicators of compromise, notify
stakeholders, and implement and document mitigation strategies.
• Learning outcomes: When presented with a known exploited vulnerability, learners will
be able to analyze impacts to the organization, find and document indicators of
compromise, and implement and document mitigation activities within a 48-hour time
frame.
• Organizational results: The CPLP manager shares the trend analysis results from
mitigation activities for known exploited vulnerabilities, which indicate that the
organization processes were followed and completed within 48 hours of notification.
Level 4 results best practices include:
• Before the learning program begins, establish baseline metrics that can be used as a
starting point for evaluating change. For example, before the learning program, the
vulnerability mitigation time was 72 hours; after the learning program, the vulnerability
mitigation time was 48 hours. 
• Utilize both quantitative and qualitative measurements to ensure a holistic view of the
learning program's impact.
• Acknowledge and communicate to senior leadership that it takes time to see the full
impact of a learning program on organizational results.
• Implement measurements and metrics on how to attribute changes to the organization
through the learning program. A learning program combined with other organizational
changes (e.g., change in resources, additional support, or new procedures) will have the
greatest impact on organizational changes.
5.2.4. Reviewing the CPLP Assessment Report with Senior Leadership
As a final step, CPLP managers meet with their Senior Leadership Committee to review the
performance of the program, address new organizational risks or concerns to include in the
learning program content, and identify any areas for significant improvement. The review will
leverage the established measurements and requirements (see Sec. 4.4) to ensure that the life
cycle approach of the CPLP (see Fig. 1) is an ongoing and continual effort.
During the meeting with the Senior Leadership Committee, discuss specific outcomes and
considerations that may impact resource requirements. Some organizations may require
documentation, such as a project proposal that outlines the issue (i.e., why it is necessary),
solution (i.e., what will solve the problem), scope of the work (i.e., summary of the learning
work), benefit (i.e., how the learning effort will benefit the employees and the organization),
and an initial estimate of the resources needed (i.e., people and financial costs) for the work.
5.3 CPLP Improvement Efforts
A CPLP provides a robust learning program that is designed to develop the knowledge and skills
of personnel to reduce and/or manage privacy and cybersecurity risks. CPLP managers and their
teams must analyze the accuracy, quality, and appropriateness of the materials in the context
of the desired outcomes and follow up after element implementation to determine whether
the materials met the goals as intended.
The NIST CSF [8], Privacy Framework, and SP 800-53r5 [11] offer guidance a CPLP can adapt to
facilitating continuous monitoring and improvements. In the CSF, Improvement Category under
the IDENTIFY Function acknowledges the importance of "improvements to organizational
cybersecurity risk management processes, procedures and activities," and the Continuous
Monitoring Category in PROTECT addresses monitoring for "anomalies, indicators of
compromise, and other potentially adverse events" (in this case ineffective materials or
processes in the CPLP, for example). The Monitoring and Review Category of the GOVERN-P
Function in the Privacy Framework discusses the need for ongoing review and informing risk
management practices based on those insights. SP 800-53r5 [11], Sec. 1.3, includes the
organizational responsibility of "[c]ontinuous monitoring of information systems and
organizations to determine the ongoing effectiveness of controls, changes in information
systems and environments of operation, and the state of security and privacy organization
wide." In this context, continuous monitoring and improvement refer to the iterative nature of
reviewing, updating, and maintaining the program in alignment with requirements and best
practices. The process can happen during any phase of the CPLP and acknowledges the
constantly shifting needs of an organization to manage resources and risks. Based on the CPLP
assessment report and any new requirements (e.g., legislative, organizational, system changes,
risk-related, etc.), CPLP managers will be able to identify opportunities for improvement. 
6. Summary
Ultimately, the goal of the CPLP is to enable the organization to withstand cybersecurity and
privacy-related risks to the organization's information and assets. The organization's workforce
is a crucial part of creating the positive cultural norms that will both support the aims of the
CPLP and contribute to greater success in changing behaviors. Avoid efforts to penalize those
who do not adapt to the culture as well as others. Rather, shine a light on individuals, teams,
and departments that improve performance, establish best practices, and help build a positive
CPLP culture. Find ways to celebrate personnel who are building the organization's CPLP culture
and share information about the CPLP's performance when appropriate. If feedback indicates
that a change is required to the learning program because something is not working, ensure
that the program is nimble enough for that adjustment to be implemented. Do not wait for the
end of the year or another arbitrary time period.
The goals of continual improvement do not need to be built on the ashes of past failures but
should be seen as an opportunity to grow and strengthen a critical program. A positive
cybersecurity and privacy culture celebrates successes while acknowledging the ever-present
risks to the organization. 