```markdown
# Abstract
Many people telework, and they use a variety of devices, such as desktop and laptop computers, smartphones, and tablets, to read and send email, access websites, review and edit documents, and perform many other tasks. Each telework device is controlled by the organization, a third party (such as the organization's contractors, business partners, and vendors), or the teleworker; the latter is known as bring your own device (BYOD). This publication provides recommendations for securing BYOD devices used for telework and remote access, as well as those directly attached to the enterprise's own networks.

# Executive Summary
Many people telework (also known as telecommuting), which is the ability for an organization's employees, contractors, business partners, vendors, and/or other users to perform work from locations other than the organization's facilities. Teleworkers use various devices, such as desktop and laptop computers, smartphones, and tablets, to read and send email, access websites, review and edit documents, and perform many other tasks. Most teleworkers use remote access, which is the ability of an organization's users to access its non-public computing resources from locations other than the organization's facilities. Organizations have many options for providing remote access, including virtual private networks, remote system control, and individual application access (e.g., webmail).

Telework devices can be divided into two categories: personal computers (desktops, laptops) and mobile devices (e.g., smartphones, tablets). Each telework device is controlled by the organization, the teleworker, or a third party the teleworker is affiliated with (a contractor, business partner, or vendor for the organization). Telework devices controlled by the user are also known as bring your own device (BYOD). This publication provides recommendations for securing BYOD devices used for telework and remote access, as well as those directly attached to the enterprise's own networks. Many organizations limit the types of BYOD devices that can be used and which resources they can use, such as permitting BYOD laptops to access a limited set of resources and permitting all other BYOD devices to access webmail only. This allows organizations to limit the risk they incur from BYOD devices. When a telework device uses remote access, it is essentially a logical extension of the organization's own network. Therefore, if the telework device is not secured properly, it poses additional risk to not only the information that the teleworker accesses but also the organization's other systems and networks. For example, a telework device infected with a worm could spread the worm through remote access to the organization's internal computers. Therefore, telework devices should be secured properly and have their security maintained regularly.

Before implementing any of the recommendations or suggestions in this guide, users should back up all data and verify the validity of the backups. Readers with little or no experience configuring
```# Telework Security Recommendations

Personal computers, mobile devices, or home networks should seek assistance in applying the recommendations. Every telework device's existing configuration and environment is unique, so changing its configuration could have unforeseen consequences, including loss of data and loss of device or application functionality.

Implementing the following recommendations should help teleworkers improve the security of their telework devices. Some of the recommendations may be challenging for many users to implement, so users who are unsure of how to implement these recommendations should seek expert assistance.

## Understanding Organizational Policies

Before teleworking, users should understand not only their organization's policies and requirements, but also appropriate ways of protecting the organization's information that they may access. Sensitive information that is stored on or sent to or from telework devices needs to be protected so that malicious parties can neither access nor alter information. An unauthorized release of sensitive information could damage the public's trust in an organization, jeopardize the mission of an organization, or harm individuals if their personal information has been released.

## Protecting Sensitive Information

Understanding how to protect such information accessed during teleworking can be confusing because there are many ways in which information can be protected. Examples include protecting the physical security of telework devices, encrypting files stored on devices, and ensuring that information stored on devices is backed up.

## Securing Home Networks

Teleworkers should ensure that all the devices on their wired and wireless home networks are properly secured, as well as the home networks themselves. An important part of telework and remote access security is applying security measures to the personal computers (PCs) and mobile devices using the same wired and wireless home networks to which the telework device normally connects. If any of these other devices become infected with malware or are otherwise compromised, they could attack the telework device or eavesdrop on its communications. Teleworkers should also be cautious about allowing others to place devices on the teleworkers' home networks, in case one of these devices is compromised.

## Applying Security Measures

Teleworkers should apply security measures to the home networks to which their telework devices normally connect. One example of a security measure is using a broadband router or firewall appliance to prevent computers outside the home network from initiating communications with telework devices on the home network. Another example is ensuring that sensitive information transmitted over a wireless home network is adequately protected through strong encryption.

## Securing BYOD Devices

Teleworkers who use a BYOD desktop or laptop (PC) for telework should secure its operating system and primary applications. Securing a BYOD PC includes the following actions:

- Using a combination of security software, such as antivirus software, personal firewalls, spam and web content filtering, and popup blocking, to stop most attacks, particularly malware;# Security Recommendations for Teleworkers

## PC Security

- Restricting who can use the PC by having a separate standard user account for each person, assigning a password to each user account, using the standard user accounts for daily use, and protecting user sessions from unauthorized physical access;
- Ensuring that updates are regularly applied to the operating system and primary applications, such as web browsers, email clients, instant messaging clients, and security software;
- Disabling unneeded networking features on the PC and configuring wireless networking securely;
- Configuring primary applications to filter content and stop other activity that is likely to be malicious;
- Installing and using only known and trusted software;
- Configuring remote access software based on the organization's requirements and recommendations; and
- Maintaining the PC's security on an ongoing basis, such as changing passwords regularly and checking the status of security software periodically.

## BYOD Mobile Device Security

Teleworkers who use a BYOD mobile device for telework should secure it based on the security recommendations from the device's manufacturer. A wide variety of mobile devices exists, and security features available for these devices also vary widely. Some devices offer only a few basic features, whereas others offer sophisticated features similar to those offered by PCs. This does not necessarily imply that more security features are better; in fact, many devices offer more security features because the capabilities they provide (e.g., wireless networking, instant messaging) make them more susceptible to attack than devices without these capabilities. General recommendations for securing BYOD mobile devices are as follows:

- Limit access to the device, such as setting a unique personal identification number (PIN) or password not used elsewhere, and automatically locking a device after an idle period;
- Disable networking capabilities, such as Bluetooth and Near Field Communication (NFC), except when they are needed;
- Ensure that security updates, if available, are acquired and installed at least weekly, preferably daily;
- Configure applications to support security (e.g., blocking activity that is likely to be malicious);
- Download and run apps only from authorized app stores;
- Do not jailbreak or root the device;
- Do not connect the device to an unknown charging station; and
- Use an isolated, protected, and encrypted environment that is supported and managed by the organization to access the organization's data and services.

## Client Device Usage

Teleworkers should avoid using any client device for telework that is not controlled by the organization, the teleworker, or the teleworker's affiliated organization (contractor, business partner, vendor, etc.). Teleworkers often want to perform remote access from unknown devices, such as checking email from a kiosk computer at a hotel or from a friend's mobile phone. However, teleworkers typically do not know if such devices have been secured properly or if they have been compromised. Consequently, a teleworker could use a device infected with malware that steals their information (e.g., passwords, email messages, and other sensitive data). Many organizations either prohibit unknown devices from being used for telework.# CURRENT_PAGE_RAW_OCR_TEXT

remote access or permit use only by having the teleworker first restart the PC with special removable media inserted so that the PC will reboot into a secure environment for telework purposes.

## 1. Introduction

### 1.1 Purpose and Scope

This publication helps teleworkers secure the networks and bring your own device (BYOD) devices they use for telework, such as personally owned desktop and laptop computers and mobile devices (e.g., smartphones, tablets). The document focuses specifically on security for telework involving remote access to organizations' non-public computing resources. It provides practical, real-world recommendations for securing telework computers' operating systems (OS) and applications, as well as home networks that the computers use. It presents basic recommendations for securing mobile devices used for telework. The document also presents advice on protecting the information stored on telework computers and removable media.

### 1.2 Audience

This document has been created primarily for teleworkers who are responsible for securing the networks and BYOD devices that they use for telework. The document also should be helpful to information security personnel and others who may need to assist teleworkers with their devices and remote access use.

### 1.3 Document Structure

This document is intended to be used by readers with various levels of experience and security knowledge, who are faced with different situations in securing their BYOD devices. For example, one reader might be securing a home network and a laptop, while another reader wants to secure a smartphone. Not all sections of this guide will apply to every situation.

The remainder of this document is organized into five major sections:

- Section 2 provides an overview of telework and remote access and an introduction to security concerns regarding telework devices.
- Section 3 provides guidelines on securing information stored on or sent to or from telework devices.
- Section 4 presents recommendations for securing wired and wireless home networks used for telework.
- Section 5 discusses securing BYOD personal computers (PC) through methods such as applying software updates and installing and configuring antivirus software and personal firewalls.
- Section 6 gives an overview of securing BYOD mobile devices.
- Section 7 describes the security considerations for third-party devices.

The document also contains several appendices with supporting material:

- Appendix A presents additional security-related considerations for telework, such as using phone services (e.g., cellular phones, Voice over Internet Protocol [VoIP] services), using wireless personal area network (WPAN) technologies such as Bluetooth, using wireless broadband data cards, and ensuring the secure destruction of removable media and printed materials that might contain sensitive information.
- Appendix B contains a glossary.
- Appendix C contains a list of acronyms and abbreviations.```markdown
# Appendix D

Appendix D lists print resources and online tools and resources that may be helpful references for securing BYOD devices.

## 2. Overview of Telework Technologies

Many people telework (also known as telecommuting), which is the ability for an organization's employees, contractors, business partners, vendors, and/or other users to perform work from locations other than the organization's facilities. Teleworkers use various devices, such as desktop and laptop computers, smartphones, and tablets, to read and send email, access websites, review and edit documents, and perform many other tasks. Most teleworkers use remote access, which is the ability for an organization's users to access its non-public computing resources from locations other than the organization's facilities.

This section of the publication provides an overview of telework technologies. It discusses commonly used remote access methods and talks about the need to secure telework devices, such as laptops and smartphones.

### 2.1 Remote Access Methods

Organizations have many options for providing remote access to their computing resources. The options most commonly used for teleworkers are as follows:

- **Virtual private network (VPN).** A VPN is a secure "tunnel" that connects the teleworker's device to the organization's network. Once the tunnel has been established, the teleworker can access many of the organization's computing resources through the tunnel. The types of VPNs most commonly used for teleworking are as follows:
- **Internet Protocol Security (IPsec) VPN.** An IPsec VPN can give teleworkers access to many different types of resources, such as applications, file servers, and printers. Using an IPsec VPN requires IPsec client software to be installed and configured on each telework device. Various applications, such as a word processor for viewing and editing documents, also may need to be installed. Because of the software installation and configuration needs, IPsec VPNs are most often accessed from computers issued and controlled by the organization. Some organizations permit teleworkers to install IPsec VPN clients on their own PCs and mobile devices. The client software is often preconfigured by the organization and provided to the teleworkers; otherwise, teleworkers can configure IPsec VPN clients built into their devices or acquire, install, and configure third-party clients.
- **Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) VPN.** Some SSL VPNs primarily provide access to web applications through standard web browsers. Other SSL VPNs are very similar to IPsec VPNs and can provide access to many types of applications; these types of VPNs typically require users to install additional software.

- **Remote system control.** Remote system control allows a teleworker to remotely use a PC at the organization from a telework device. The remote PC has the software installed that the teleworker needs to run, such as office productivity software (e.g., word processors, spreadsheet programs) and...
```# Telework Access Methods

## Remote System Control

The remote system control method most commonly used for telework is terminal server access, which gives each teleworker access to a separate standard virtual desktop. Terminal server access requires the teleworker to either install a special client application on the telework device or use a web interface, often with a browser plug-in or other additional software that the organization provides. A similar method is known as virtual desktop infrastructure (VDI), and it delivers virtual images of operating systems to users. Yet another method that is essentially VDI for smartphones and tablets is known as virtual mobile infrastructure (VMI).

## Individual Application Access

- **Individual application access.** A teleworker can access an individual application remotely, usually a web application such as email access. This type of access typically requires only a web browser on the telework device, so in most cases there is no need to reconfigure the device or install software on it before accessing the applications.

## Internet Access Methods

There are many ways in which teleworkers gain access to the Internet, including broadband networks (e.g., cable modem, wireless broadband), cellular networks, wireless hotspots, and other organizations' networks. For this publication, the access method used is typically irrelevant; any special considerations related to a particular method are highlighted.

## Authentication and Security

Most of the computing resources used through remote access are available only to an organization's users. Before accessing such resources, the users need to demonstrate their identities, such as with usernames and passwords or with credentials from a Personal Identity Verification (PIV) smart card or derived PIV credentials. Many remote access solutions require teleworkers to authenticate multiple times; for example, a teleworker might need to authenticate to use a VPN, and then authenticate to individual applications accessed through the VPN. Many organizations have separate authentication systems for remote access, and it is common for teleworkers to be issued a hardware token and to have to enter a code from the token into the computer to be authenticated. Many organizations also require teleworkers to reauthenticate periodically during long remote access sessions, such as after each eight hours of a session or after 30 minutes of idle time. These authentication options help organizations confirm that the person using remote access is authorized to do so.

## Communication Protection

Most remote access technologies and many individual applications are able to encrypt their communications automatically. This ability prevents attackers on the Internet and other networks from eavesdropping on the communications or tampering with them. It is outside the scope of this publication to provide a detailed explanation of communications protection. Teleworkers should check with their organizations as to what protection is applied to their communications, so that they do not inadvertently transfer sensitive information over networks without adequate protection.

# Telework Devices

Telework devices can be divided into two general categories:

- **Personal computers (PC),** which are desktop and laptop computers. PCs run desktop/laptop applications.# Operating Systems and Remote Access

Operating systems such as Windows, Apple OS X, and Linux. PCs can be used for any of the remote access methods described in Section 2.1.

- **Mobile devices**, which are small mobile computers such as smartphones and tablets. Mobile devices are most often used for remote access methods that use web browsers, primarily SSL VPNs and individual web application access. The difference between PCs and mobile devices is decreasing. Mobile devices are offering more functionality previously provided only by PCs. Still, the security controls available for PCs and mobile devices are significantly different as of this writing, so this publication provides separate recommendations for PCs and mobile devices, where applicable.

## Categories of Telework Devices

Another set of categories used in the recommendations is the party that is responsible for the security of the telework device. These categories are as follows:

- **Organization**. Telework devices in this category are usually acquired, configured, and managed by the organization. These devices can be used for any of the organization's remote access methods.

- **Third-Party-Controlled**. These telework devices are controlled by a third party, typically one that employs the teleworker on behalf of the organization (such as one of the organization's contractors, business partners, or vendors). This third party is ultimately responsible for securing the telework devices and maintaining their security. These devices can usually be used for many or all of the organization's remote access methods.

- **Bring Your Own Device (BYOD)**. All non-organization-controlled devices managed by the teleworkers themselves are also known as bring your own device (BYOD). These devices can usually be used for many or all of the organization's remote access methods.

- **Unknown**. Labeled as "unknown" because there are no assurances regarding their security, these telework devices are owned and controlled by other parties, such as kiosk computers at hotels, and PCs or mobile devices owned by friends and family. Remote access options for these devices are typically quite limited because users cannot or should not install the organization's software onto them, such as VPN software, terminal server software, and web browser plug-ins. Their use is extremely risky because of the unknown nature of their security posture. Therefore, many organizations either prohibit the use of unknown devices for telework or permit use only by having the user first restart the PC with special removable media inserted so that the PC will reboot into a secure environment for telework purposes.

## Device Limitations

For various reasons, including security policies and technology limitations, organizations often limit which types of devices can be used for remote access. For example, an organization might permit only its own PCs and mobile devices to be used. Some organizations have tiered access levels, such as allowing organization PCs to access many resources, BYOD PCs to access a more limited set of resources, and BYOD mobile devices to access only one or two resources, such as webmail. This allows an organization to limit the risk it incurs by permitting the most-controlled devices to have access.# Telework Device Security Overview

the most access and the least-controlled devices to have minimal access or no access at all. Before using a BYOD device, each teleworker should check with his or her organization to confirm that the organization permits the teleworker's BYOD devices to be used. Teleworkers should also be aware that many organizations periodically reassess their policies for telework devices and may change which types of devices are permitted, so teleworkers should ensure they review current information on remote access devices.

## 2.3 Telework Device Security Overview

In today's computing environment, there are many threats to telework devices. These threats are posed by people with many different motivations, including causing mischief and disruption, and committing identity theft and other forms of fraud. Teleworkers can increase their devices' security to provide better protection against these threats. The primary threat against most telework devices is malware. Malware, also known as malicious code, refers to a computer program that is covertly placed onto a computing device with the intent of compromising the confidentiality, integrity, or availability of the device's data, applications, or OS. Common types of malware threats include viruses, worms, malicious mobile code, Trojan horses, rootkits, spyware, and bots. Malware threats can infect devices through many means, including email, websites, file downloads and file sharing, peer-to-peer software, instant messaging, and social media.

Another common threat against telework devices is loss or theft of the device. Someone with physical access to a device has many options for attempting to view or copy the information stored on it. Security protections, also known as security controls, are measures against threats that are intended to compensate for the device's security weaknesses, also known as vulnerabilities. Threats attempt to take advantage of these vulnerabilities. Some vulnerabilities can be eliminated through security protections, such as a feature in an application that automatically downloads and installs new versions of the application that have corrected previous errors. For vulnerabilities that cannot be eliminated, security protections can prevent attacks from taking advantage of them, such as antivirus software stopping an infected email from being opened by a user, or hard drive encryption making files unreadable by others.

Regardless of how many security protections are used, it is simply impossible to provide 100 percent protection against attacks because of the complexity of computing. A more realistic goal is to use security protections to give attackers as few opportunities as feasible to gain access to a device or to damage the device's software or information.

For an organization, permitting teleworkers to remotely access its computing resources gives attackers additional opportunities to breach the organization's security. When a telework device uses remote access, it is essentially an extension of the organization's own network. The same is true when a BYOD device is directly connected to the organization's local network. Therefore, if the telework device is not...# Securing Telework Devices

Secured properly, it poses additional risk not only to the information that the teleworker accesses, but also to the organization's other systems and networks. For example, a telework device infected with a worm could spread it through remote access to the organization's internal computers. Therefore, telework devices should be secured properly and have their security maintained regularly.

Many organizations automatically check the security health of each telework device that attempts to use remote access to ensure that it complies with the organization's policies. Examples of the checks are verifying that a PC's OS is fully patched, antivirus software is installed and up-to-date, and a personal firewall is enabled, or seeing if a smartphone has been rooted or jailbroken. Some remote access solutions can also determine if the device has been secured by the organization and what type of device it is (e.g., desktop/laptop, smartphone, tablet). Based on the results of these checks, the organization can determine whether the device should be permitted to use remote access.

The remainder of this publication provides recommendations for securing telework devices. The recommendations address securing PCs and mobile devices, securing the networks that telework devices use, and protecting information stored on and sent to and from telework devices. This publication also provides guidance on evaluating the security of unknown devices, so that teleworkers can decide whether the devices should be used for remote access.

## 3. Securing Information

Sensitive information, such as personally identifiable information (PII) (e.g., personnel records, medical records, financial records), that is stored on or sent to or from telework devices needs to be protected so that malicious parties cannot access or alter it. An unauthorized release of sensitive information could damage the public's trust in an organization, jeopardize the organization's mission, or harm individuals if their personal information has been released.

Before teleworking, users should understand their organization's policies and requirements and the appropriate ways of protecting the organization's information. This can be confusing because there are many ways in which information can be protected. Examples of methods that organizations may expect or require teleworkers to use are as follows:

- Using physical security controls for telework devices and removable media. For example, an organization might require that laptops not be left unattended when taken to hotels, conferences, and other locations where third parties could easily gain physical access to the devices. Organizations may also have physical security requirements for papers and other non-computer media that contain sensitive information and are taken outside the organization's facilities.

- Encrypting files stored on telework devices and removable media such as CDs and flash drives. This prevents attackers from readily gaining access to information in the files. Many options exist for protecting files, including encrypting individual files or folders, volumes, and hard drives. Generally, using an encryption method to protect files also requires the use of an authentication mechanism (e.g., password) to decrypt the files when needed.```markdown
# Telework Information Security Guidelines

## Ensuring that information stored on telework devices is backed up
If something adverse happens to a device, such as a hardware, software, or power failure or a natural disaster, the information on the device will be lost unless it has been backed up to another device or removable media. Some organizations permit teleworkers to back up their local files to a centralized system (e.g., through VPN remote access), whereas other organizations recommend that their teleworkers perform local backups (e.g., burning CDs, copying files onto removable media). Teleworkers should perform backups, following their organizations' guidelines, and verify that the backups are valid and complete. It is important that backups on removable media be secured at least as well as the device that they backed up. For example, if a computer is stored in a locked room, then the media also should be in a secured location; if a computer stores its data encrypted, then the backups of that data should also be encrypted.

## Ensuring that information is destroyed when it is no longer needed
For example, the organization's files should be removed from a computer that is about to be retired. Some remote access methods perform basic information cleanup, such as clearing web browser caches that might inadvertently hold sensitive information, but more extensive cleanup typically requires using a special utility, such as a disk scrubbing program specifically designed to remove all traces of information from a device. Many organizations offer their teleworkers assistance in removing information from BYOD devices. Another example of information destruction is shredding telework papers containing sensitive information once the papers are no longer needed.

## Erasing information from missing devices
If a smartphone or tablet is lost or stolen, its contents might be remotely erasable by the organization or its service provider, particularly if the device has cellular networking enabled. Erasing the contents prevents an attacker from obtaining any information from the device. The availability of this service depends on the capabilities of the product and the company providing network services for the product.

## Protection options for teleworkers
Each situation may require a different combination of protection options: for example, an organization might require one combination for SSL VPN access from BYOD PCs and another combination for access to an individual application from BYOD mobile devices. Teleworkers should follow their organizations' requirements and recommendations for protecting sensitive information accessed with telework devices. Some organizations use the same requirements and recommendations for all types of information because of the difficulties in differentiating sensitive and nonsensitive information. Teleworkers also need to ensure that they adequately protect their remote access-specific authenticators, such as passwords, personal identification numbers (PIN), and hardware tokens. Such authenticators should not be stored with the telework device, nor should multiple authenticators be stored with each other (e.g., a password or PIN should not be written on the back of a hardware token).
```# Telework Security Guidelines

Teleworkers should also be aware of how to handle threats involving social engineering, which is a general term for attackers trying to trick people into revealing sensitive information or performing certain actions, such as downloading and executing files that appear to be benign but are actually malicious. For example, an attacker might approach a teleworker in a coffee shop and ask to use the computer for a minute or offer to help the teleworker with using the computer. Teleworkers should be wary of any requests they receive that could lead to a security breach or the theft of a telework device. Teleworkers should ask their organizations for training regarding how to recognize and handle social engineering attempts, if such training is not already being provided.

If a teleworker suspects that a security breach (including loss or theft of materials) has occurred involving a telework device, remote access communications, removable media, or other telework components, the teleworker should immediately follow the organization's policy and procedures for reporting the possible breach. This is particularly important if any of the affected telework components contain sensitive information such as PII, so that the potential impact of a security breach is minimized. Teleworkers should also contact the appropriate point of contact within the organization whenever they have questions or concerns related to telework security.

## 4. Securing Home Networks and Using Other Networks

An important part of telework and remote access security is applying security measures to the home networks to which the telework device normally connects. A major component of home network security is securing other PCs and mobile devices on the home network. If any of these devices become infected with malware or are otherwise compromised, they could be used to attack the telework device or eavesdrop on its communications. Consequently, teleworkers should ensure that all devices on their home networks are secured properly. Teleworkers should also be cautious about allowing others to place devices on the teleworkers' wired and wireless home networks, in case one of these devices has been or will be compromised. Teleworkers also need to be aware of the risks of using external networks and of the procedures for connecting their telework devices, including BYOD devices, to the organization's own networks.

Sections 4.1 and 4.2 present recommendations for securing wired and wireless home networks, respectively. Section 4.3 briefly discusses the security implications of performing telework from external networks. (Many of the recommendations made in Sections 4.1 through 4.3 may be challenging for many users to implement. Users who are unsure of how to implement these recommendations should seek expert assistance.) Finally, Section 4.4 discusses issues regarding connecting BYOD devices to an organization's own networks.

### 4.1 Wired Home Networks

Teleworkers should secure their wired home networks to help protect their telework devices. The most important part of securing most wired home networks is separating the home network from the network's# Internet Service Provider (ISP)

As much as possible. If a telework device connects directly to the teleworker's ISP, such as plugging the device directly into a cable modem, then the device becomes directly accessible from the Internet and is at very high risk of being attacked. To prevent this from occurring, the home network should have a security device between the ISP and the telework device. This is most commonly accomplished by using a broadband router (e.g., cable modem router) or a firewall appliance.

This security device should be configured to prevent computers outside the home network from initiating communications with any of the devices on the home network, including the telework device. Even if each device uses a personal firewall, a firewall appliance, broadband router, or other similar protection should also be used to provide an additional layer of security. For example, if a personal firewall on a computer malfunctioned, the appliance or router would still protect the computer from unsolicited network communications from external computers. In some cases, the appliance or router also can protect devices on the home network from each other if the devices are logically separated by the appliance or router. For example, a router that has both wired and wireless interfaces might be able to prevent the spread of certain types of malware from a device on the wireless network to a device on the wired network, depending on the router's capabilities and configuration. However, such home network configurations are relatively complex to set up and maintain, so only users who are proficient in networking and security should consider implementing these configurations.

When installing and configuring firewall appliances, broadband routers, and similar devices, teleworkers should perform the security precautions described in the manufacturer's documentation. The following are some examples of possible precautions:

- Changing default passwords on the device so that attackers cannot use them to gain access to the device (lists of default passwords are widely available on the Internet);
- Configuring the device so that it cannot be administered from outside the home network, preventing external attackers from taking control of the device;
- Configuring the device to silently ignore unsolicited requests sent to it, which essentially hides the device from malicious parties. Teleworkers should check with their ISP before configuring a device this way, because it could inadvertently interfere with necessary communications with the ISP's infrastructure;
- Checking for updates and applying them periodically, as explained in the manufacturer's documentation—either automatically (typically daily or weekly) or manually (to be performed by the teleworker at least monthly); and
- For broadband routers, turning off or disabling built-in wireless access points (APs) that are not used.

The proper precautionary measures for a firewall appliance, broadband router, etc. vary greatly from device to device, so some or all of these options may not be applicable to many devices.

## 4.2 Wireless Home Networks# Wireless Networking Security for Teleworkers

Wireless networking transfers information through the air between a telework device and a wireless AP. If improperly configured, a wireless home network will transmit sensitive information without adequate protection, exposing it to other wireless devices in close proximity. Accordingly, teleworkers should secure their wireless home networks so that their remote access communications are protected.

Teleworkers should follow the security recommendations from the documentation for the home network's wireless AP. Assuming that the network is using Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) 802.11 protocols, the following are examples of common security recommendations:

- **Use strong encryption to protect communications.** An industry group called the Wi-Fi Alliance has created a series of product security certifications called Wi-Fi Protected Access (WPA), which include the WPA and WPA2 certifications. These certifications define sets of security requirements for wireless networking devices. Devices with wireless network cards that support either WPA or WPA2 can use their security features, such as encrypting network communications with the Advanced Encryption Security (AES) algorithm. Recommended choices, in order with the most preferred option first, are as follows:
1. WPA2 with AES
2. WPA with AES
3. WPA with Temporal Key Integrity Protocol (TKIP)

Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP) is an earlier form of protection for wireless communications that has serious flaws. Attackers can easily circumvent WEP and gain access to the information being sent over the wireless network. If WEP is the only protection option available for a home network, users should configure it to use 128-bit encryption (which will somewhat slow attacks), use the organization's secure remote access solution (e.g., VPN) to protect their remote access communications, and avoid sending any sensitive information unprotected.

- **Use a WPA2, WPA, or WEP key (depending on the option selected above).** This key is a series of characters (either a password composed of letters, digits, and punctuation, or a hexadecimal number) that is used to limit access to a wireless network. A wireless AP can be configured to require each device to provide the same key as the one stored in the AP. Devices that do not know the key cannot use the wireless network. The key should be long and complex, making it difficult for others to guess. This should help to prevent people near the AP from gaining unauthorized access to the network.

- **Permit access for only particular wireless network cards.** Some APs can be configured to allow only specific devices to use the wireless network. This is accomplished by identifying the media access control (MAC) address of each device's wireless network card and entering the MAC address into a list on the AP. Because a MAC address should be unique to a particular network interface, specifying its MAC address in the AP can be helpful in preventing some unauthorized parties from gaining wireless network access. (Consult a device's documentation to learn how to determine its MAC address.)# CURRENT_PAGE_RAW_OCR_TEXT

## MAC address.

- Change the default service set identifier (SSID). An SSID is a name assigned to a wireless AP. The SSID allows people and devices to distinguish one wireless network from another. Most APs have a default SSID—often the manufacturer or product's name. If this default SSID is not changed, and another nearby wireless network has the same default SSID, then the teleworker's device might accidentally attempt to join the wrong wireless network. Changing the SSID to something unusual—not the default value or an obvious value, such as "SSID" or "wireless"—makes it much less likely that a device will choose the wrong network.

- Disable SSID broadcasts from the wireless AP. Many wireless APs broadcast the SSID, which essentially advertises the existence of the AP to any computers in the vicinity. Configuring an AP so that it does not broadcast its SSID makes it less likely that people will inadvertently attempt to join the wireless network, but does not stop an attacker from doing so.

- Disable AP administration through wireless communications. Flaws are frequently identified in the administration utilities for wireless APs. If an AP has such a flaw, attackers in the vicinity could reconfigure it to disable its security features or use it to acquire access to the teleworker's home network or the Internet. To prevent such incidents, teleworkers should configure APs so that they can only be administered locally, if feasible—such as running a cable between a computer and the AP—and not administered wirelessly or otherwise remotely.

## 4.3 External Networks

Teleworkers should be aware that networks other than their home networks are unlikely to provide much protection for their telework devices and communications, such as a laptop using a wireless hotspot at a coffee shop. For example, external networks may not encrypt network communications, making them susceptible to eavesdropping, particularly for wireless networks. Telework devices on external networks are also often directly accessible from the Internet. Some networks provide partial protection, such as blocking specific types of communications usually associated with malicious activity and checking communications for the most common known threats, such as widespread worms or spam messages.

Because there is usually no easy way for teleworkers to determine what protection an external network might be providing for their devices, teleworkers should assume that third-party networks are not providing any protection. Telework devices on third-party networks are generally at higher risk of being compromised than those on home networks, and their communications are also at higher risk of being monitored. Before using a third-party network, teleworkers should ensure that their devices are fully updated (see Section 5.1 and Section 6). The updates should be retrieved over a trusted network, such as the user's home network. When teleworkers use a third-party network to access their organization's computing resources, they should use a VPN or other secure remote access solution provided by the organization, and they should activate the secure remote access solution (e.g.,# Establishing a VPN Session
immediately after connecting to the third-party network, if applicable.

## 4.4 Organization Networks
Organizations may choose to permit BYOD devices to directly connect to networks within their facilities, such as using a wireless network within a user's office building. Teleworkers who are interested in bringing BYOD devices into the office to use enterprise networks should first determine if the organization permits such network access, and if they do, then find out which network(s) the BYOD devices are allowed to use. Many organizations set up a dedicated BYOD network, usually wireless, and this network is the only one that BYOD devices can directly connect to. Teleworkers should not connect any BYOD devices to an organization's internal networks without explicit permission to do so.

## 5. Securing BYOD Telework PCs
Teleworkers who use BYOD desktop or laptop PCs for telework should implement the recommendations presented in this section. These recommendations should be helpful in securing a PC's OS and primary applications. Teleworkers who do not need to secure BYOD PCs may skip this section. Some of the recommendations made in this section may be challenging for many users to implement. Users who are unsure of how to implement these recommendations should seek expert assistance.

### 5.1 Software Updates
Many threats take advantages of vulnerabilities in software on PCs. Software manufacturers release updates for their software to eliminate these vulnerabilities. Accordingly, teleworkers should ensure that updates are applied regularly to the major software on their BYOD PCs. In addition to the OS, updating should include the following types of software:
- Web browsers;
- Email clients;
- Instant messaging clients;
- Office productivity software (document viewers, word processors, spreadsheet tools, etc.);
- Antivirus software; and
- Personal firewalls.

Teleworkers should review manufacturer documentation for each software program their PC contains in these categories to determine each program's update capabilities. Most major software programs provide built-in mechanisms to update themselves automatically. Teleworkers should enable these features so that the programs check for updates at least weekly, preferably daily (especially for antivirus software and other security software). For any programs that do not offer automatic updating, the teleworker should determine from the documentation other available options, such as running an update feature from the application's menus every week or visiting the manufacturer's website weekly for updates and downloading and installing any available updates.

For a PC with metered connectivity, such as a cellular modem, teleworkers should be cautious when configuring automatic software update features. Because many updates are very large, downloading them over metered networks could be quite costly. Large updates should be downloaded over non-metered.# CURRENT_PAGE_RAW_OCR_TEXT

networks whenever feasible. Some software manufacturers offer updates at no charge, whereas others require an annual fee or other payment to receive updates, such as paying a subscription fee to get the latest antivirus signatures. Most software manufacturers that charge a fee allow users to pay it through the manufacturer's website and receive updates within minutes of making payment.

## 5.2 User Accounts and Sessions

A PC can be configured with user accounts and passwords to restrict who can use the PC. This section explains how teleworkers can configure their BYOD PCs to prevent unauthorized access to their applications and data.

### 5.2.1 Use Accounts with Limited Privileges

On most OSs, user accounts can have full privileges or limited privileges. Accounts with full privileges, also known as administrative accounts, should be used only when performing PC management tasks, such as installing updates and application software, managing user accounts, and modifying OS and application settings. If a PC is attacked while an administrative account is in use, the attack will be able to inflict more damage to the PC. Therefore, user accounts should be set up to have limited privileges; such accounts are known as daily use, limited, or standard user accounts. Teleworkers should not use administrative accounts for general tasks, such as reading email, web browsing, and social networking, because such tasks are common ways of infecting PCs with malware.

The primary disadvantages of having separate administrative and standard user accounts are that standard users might not be able to run some applications, especially ones designed for older OSs, or to install applications and OS or application updates. This could cause a significant delay in downloading and installing updates, as well as making other tasks less convenient for users. Some OSs have a feature that allows a person logged in as a standard user to perform individual administrative tasks by selecting a particular option.

Each person who uses the telework PC should have a separate standard user account. On most OSs, this keeps each person's data and settings (e.g., files, stored emails, web browser bookmarks and security settings) private from other people using the PC. It also helps limit how much damage certain attacks can cause, such as damaging only one user's files, not all users' files.

### 5.2.2 Protect Accounts with Passwords

Each PC user account should have a password to prevent unauthorized people from using the PC—not only people with physical access to the PC, but also attackers attempting to contact the PC from other computers. Users should select strong passwords that cannot be guessed by attackers. The following are recommended practices for password selection:

- Select a sufficiently long password. Longer passwords are more difficult to guess than shorter passwords of similar complexity (see below). The downside is that longer passwords are often more difficult for users to remember. Users should select passwords that are at least eight characters long. Passphrases, which are long passwords composed of multiple words, may be easier to remember than# Conventional Passwords

- Create a complex password. A variety of characters should be part of the password. For example, a password made of all lower case letters is a relatively simple password, but another password of the same length made of upper and lower case letters, digits, and symbols (such as punctuation marks) is relatively complex. The more complex the password is, the more difficult it will be for others to guess. Users should select passwords containing digits and/or symbols in addition to letters. Users should not create new passwords that are very similar to old passwords. For example, if the old password was "dahlia*1", the new password should not be "dahlia*2".

- Do not use password hints. Password hints can be very helpful to people in guessing others' passwords and using them to gain unauthorized access to a PC. Users should not use password hints unless their PCs do not need protection from people with physical access to them.

- Do not use the same password for other accounts. Teleworkers should not use the same password for multiple accounts, such as organization and personal email accounts, instant messaging accounts, and e-commerce website accounts. If the password used for the telework PC is also used for other user accounts and an attacker learned one of the passwords, the attacker could then access the other accounts.

Teleworkers should change their passwords regularly, based on the interval specified in their organizations' password policies. This is necessary because if a password is unknowingly revealed to an unauthorized person or uncovered by malware or other automated attacks, the password could be used without authorization until the teleworker changes the password.

If an OS password is forgotten, especially for an administrative account, it may be difficult to regain access to the PC. Therefore, users should consider writing down their OS passwords and storing them in a physically secure location, such as a locked fire safe. Users should also safeguard their other passwords, such as application and website passwords. For example, some organizations provide cryptographic tokens to teleworkers that can be used to hold passwords. When the teleworker needs to retrieve a password, he or she authenticates to the token (such as entering a PIN into the token), and the token provides the password. The token helps prevent users from losing their passwords while also protecting the passwords from attackers. Another option for protecting application and website passwords is a password management utility, which is a program that can be used to generate, store, and access passwords securely. A teleworker typically enters a single password to gain access to all the passwords stored by the utility.

## 5.2.3 Protect User Sessions from Unauthorized Physical Access

It is important that user sessions be protected against unauthorized physical access. For example, if a PC is sitting unattended in an area that other people can access, anyone could walk up to the PC and masquerade as the user, such as sending email from the user's account, accessing the organization's...# CURRENT_PAGE_RAW_OCR_TEXT

## Remote Access Resources

Making purchases from websites, or accessing sensitive information stored on the PC. To prevent such events, most OSs allow the user to lock the current session through menu options or a combination of keystrokes. Also, many OSs offer screensavers that activate automatically after the PC has been idle for a certain number of minutes, and can also be activated manually by the user on demand. Some of these screensavers can be configured to lock the PC and require the user to enter his or her password to unlock it. If a PC will be left unattended in an accessible area at any time, users should use a password-protected screensaver or manually lock their user sessions. However, users should be aware that these security features provide only short-term protection; someone who has access to the PC for an extended period of time can bypass these features and gain access to the user's session and data.

## 5.3 Networking Configuration

Most PCs can be configured to limit network access, which reduces the number of ways in which attackers can try to gain access to the PC. This section makes recommendations for configuring networking features to better protect the PC.

### 5.3.1 Disable Unneeded Networking Features

By default, most PCs provide several networking features that can provide communications and data sharing between PCs. Most teleworkers need to use only a few of these features. Because many attacks are network based, PCs should use only the necessary networking features. For example, file and printer sharing services, which allow other computers to access a telework PC's files and printers, should be disabled unless the PC shares its files or printers with other computers, or if a particular application on the PC requires the service to be enabled. Other examples of services that might not be needed are IPv6 protocols and wireless networking protocols (e.g., Bluetooth, IEEE 802.11, NFC [Near Field Communication]). Consult the PC's hardware and OS documentation for guidance on which network features should be disabled; if still unsure, seek expert assistance.

### 5.3.2 Limit the Use of Remote Access Utilities

Some OSs offer features that allow a teleworker to get remote technical support assistance from a coworker, friend, product manufacturer, or others when running into problems with a PC. Many applications are also available that permit remote access to the PC from other computers. Although these features are convenient, they also increase the risk that the PC will be accessed by attackers. Therefore, such utilities should be kept disabled at all times except specifically when needed. The utilities should also be configured to require the remote person to be authenticated, usually with a username and password, before gaining access to the PC. (See the recommendations in Section 5.2.2 for choosing strong passwords.) Provide the username and password to the remote person in person, by phone, or by other means that cannot be monitored by attackers; do not send passwords through email messages, instant messaging, or other methods that may not provide protection for communications.

### 5.3.3 Configure Wireless Networking

An improperly configured wireless network could transmit sensitive information.# CURRENT_PAGE_RAW_OCR_TEXT

## without protecting it
properly, allowing people nearby to eavesdrop. Section 4.2 explains how to secure a wireless home network. In addition, PCs should be configured so that they do not automatically attempt to join wireless networks they detect. For example, a PC could join a neighbor's wireless home network instead of the teleworker's network; if that neighbor's network is improperly secured, then the teleworker's communications and computer could be at higher risk. Therefore, teleworkers should configure their PCs so they do not join detected wireless networks automatically, with the exception of the organization's own wireless networks, if such access is authorized. Teleworkers should also configure their PCs so that they cannot use ad hoc networking, which is a relatively easy way to attack a PC.

## 5.4 Attack Prevention
As explained in Section 2, no 100 percent solution exists for computer security; it is simply not possible to thwart every single attack. PCs should use a combination of software and software features that will stop most attacks, particularly malware. The types of software described in this section are antivirus software, personal firewalls, spam and web content filtering, and popup blocking. Changing a few settings on common applications, such as email clients and web browsers, can also stop some attacks.

Although security tools can stop many attacks, teleworkers also need to practice safe computing habits. One of the most common ways that PCs are attacked is by users opening and executing files from unknown and untrusted sources. Teleworkers may download these files from websites, file sharing services, or other means, or they may be sent to teleworkers through email, instant messaging, social media, and other communications services. These files often contain malware, and teleworkers unknowingly infect their PCs by trying to use these files. Teleworkers should avoid using any files that are coming from unknown and untrusted sources. Other people using a BYOD PC should also be made aware of safe computing habits.

### 5.4.1 Install and Configure Antivirus Software
Antivirus software is specifically designed to detect many forms of malware and prevent them from infecting PCs, as well as cleaning PCs that have already been infected. Because malware is the most common threat against PCs, NIST recommends that PCs use antivirus software at all times. The antivirus software should be kept up-to-date, as described in Section 5.1. Many brands of antivirus software are available, most of which offer similar functionality. NIST recommends configuring antivirus software to use the following types of functions:

- Automatically checking for and acquiring updates of signature or data definition files at least daily;
- Scanning critical OS components, such as startup files, system basic input/output system (BIOS), and boot records;
- Monitoring the behavior of common applications, such as email clients, web browsers, file transfer and file sharing programs, and instant messaging software;
- Performing real-time scans of each file as it is downloaded, opened, or executed;```markdown
- Scanning all hard drives regularly to identify any file system infections, and optionally scanning removable media as well;
- Handling files that are infected by attempting to disinfect them, which refers to removing malware from within a file, and quarantining them, which means that files containing malware are stored in isolation for future disinfection or examination; and
- Logging all significant events, such as the results of scans, the startup and shutdown of antivirus software, the installation of updates, and the discovery and handling of any instances of malware.

## 5.4.2 Use Personal Firewalls

A personal firewall is a software program that monitors communications between a PC and other computers and that blocks communications that are unwanted. When properly configured, a personal firewall limits the ability of other computers to initiate communications with the telework PC. This can significantly reduce the exposure of the PC to network-based attacks, such as worms and botnets. A personal firewall can also be used to protect shared resources on a PC, such as file and print shares. Accordingly, a personal firewall should be enabled on every telework PC.

Personal firewalls should be configured to log significant events, such as blocked and allowed activity, the startup and shutdown of the firewall software, and firewall configuration changes, to assist in troubleshooting problems. All personal firewalls can monitor incoming communications, and some can also monitor outbound communications; the latter offers better security, but it can also inadvertently cause problems in using certain applications.

Although personal firewalls are important security controls for PCs, some can be relatively difficult to configure correctly. If a personal firewall is configured to be too restrictive, it could prevent some applications or OS functions from working correctly. For example, a personal firewall might prevent the use of file and print services. On the other hand, if a personal firewall is configured to be too permissive, it could permit attacks to compromise the PC. Teleworkers should read their personal firewall documentation carefully to gain a solid understanding of how it should be configured. If it is not clear, teleworkers should seek expert guidance on configuring their personal firewalls.

Ideally, personal firewalls should deny all types of communications that teleworkers have not specifically approved as being permitted. This is known as a deny by default configuration because all communications that are not on the exception list are denied (blocked) automatically. Most firewalls can be configured to allow communications based on lists of authorized applications, such as web browsers contacting web servers and email clients sending and receiving email messages. Communications involving any other application are either denied automatically, or permitted or denied based on the teleworker responding to a prompt asking for a decision regarding the activity. For example, if a teleworker installs a new application and runs it for the first time, the firewall might ask the teleworker if that application should be allowed to access the Internet.

Unfortunately, this feature can be problematic. Personal firewalls often do not
```# Provide Clear Information

On which application is attempting to use the network, so teleworkers struggle to determine if the activity is benign or malicious. If the nature of the activity is unclear, cautious teleworkers often choose to block the activity, but this may inadvertently disrupt legitimate activity. To avoid this problem, many teleworkers choose to permit access whenever asked, but this could support malicious activity. When unsure what to do, teleworkers should search for additional information about the service or software in question or ask someone with more security expertise for assistance.

## Personal Firewall

Each PC should only have a single personal firewall enabled. If multiple firewalls are enabled, they may interfere with each other. For example, one firewall might allow activity that the other one has been configured to block. This could slow the performance of the PC, cause applications to stop functioning properly, and weaken the computer's security. When enabling a firewall, teleworkers should verify that the firewall's functionality is enabled for every network interface on the PC, including VPNs and wired, wireless, and virtual network cards.

Many personal firewalls offer additional security features. For example, some firewalls offer the ability to require teleworkers to enter a password before accessing the firewall's configuration settings. This protects the configuration from being inadvertently or purposely altered by a user.

Teleworkers should be aware that most firewalls are frequently stopping unwanted activity. For example, worms and other malware are constantly trying to infect more PCs. Teleworkers should not be alarmed by notices from their firewall that indicate that incoming connections were blocked or that a specific attack was attempted. If a firewall indicates that the PC was just scanned for a particular worm, this does not in any way indicate that the PC has actually been infected with a worm.

## Enable and Configure Content Filtering Software

Content filtering is the process of monitoring communications such as email and web pages, analyzing them for suspicious content, and preventing the delivery of suspicious content to users. Two common types of content filtering are spam filtering software and web content filtering software.

Spam is often used to deliver spyware and other forms of malware to users. Spam is also frequently used for performing phishing attacks, which are deceptive computer-based means to trick individuals into disclosing sensitive personal information. Spam filtering software analyzes emails to search for spam characteristics, and typically places messages that appear to be spam in a separate email folder. Most organizations perform spam filtering for their users; however, because spam filtering is subjective, some spam will still reach users, and some desired email messages will accidentally be classified as spam. Still, spam filtering software can significantly reduce the amount of spam that reaches users. Many email clients also offer spam filtering capabilities.

Users can refine spam filtering capabilities through the following customization options:

- **Blacklists.** A blacklist is a list of email senders who have previously sent spam to a user. When a user...# CURRENT_PAGE_RAW_OCR_TEXT

## Spam Filtering

When a user receives a spam message, he or she can request that the sender's email address be added to a blacklist. This will cause future emails from the same sender to be classified as spam automatically.

### Whitelists

A whitelist is a list of email senders that are known to be benign, such as coworkers, friends, and family. A user can add their email addresses to a whitelist, which will cause their future emails to not be classified as spam. Spam filtering accidentally classifies some emails as spam that are not, but a whitelist overrides that classification and ensures that emails from trusted senders are received by the user.

### Bayesian Spam Filters

A Bayesian spam filter determines the likelihood that a particular email message is spam, based on a comparison of the email's characteristics with those of previously received spam messages. When a user receives email, the user corrects any errors that the spam filtering software has made. The Bayesian filter then analyzes the benign messages and the spam to record their characteristics. For example, a Bayesian filter might record that a user has received 35 spam messages containing the phrase "FREE FREE FREE" but no benign messages with that phrase. When a user receives a new email, the filter looks for that phrase, as well as any other characteristics associated with benign or spam messages, and assigns a spam probability to the message. The effectiveness of Bayesian filters depends on users reviewing all their emails and ensuring each is marked correctly as being spam or not.

## Web Content Filtering

Web content filtering software typically works by comparing a website address that a user attempts to access with a list of known bad websites. Although the primary purpose of web content filtering software is to prevent access to inappropriate materials, many also contain lists of websites that are known as hostile, such as those attempting to distribute malware to visitors or hosting phishing websites. Web content filtering software might inadvertently classify benign content as inappropriate or vice versa.

From a telework PC security perspective, spam content filtering technologies and web content filtering technologies are strongly recommended. All content filtering products that are used should be kept up-to-date to ensure that their detection is as accurate as possible.

## 5.5 Primary Application Configuration

Many attacks, particularly malware, take advantage of features provided by common applications such as email clients, web browsers, instant messaging clients, and office productivity suites. By default, applications often are configured to favor functionality over security. Accordingly, teleworkers should consider disabling unneeded features and capabilities from applications, particularly those that are commonly exploited by malware. Teleworkers should also consider configuring applications to filter content and stop other activity that is likely to be malicious. Examples of application settings to consider are listed below. Teleworkers should be aware that a single PC might have multiple web browsers, email clients, instant messaging clients, and office productivity suites installed, each of which may have.# Different Features and Configuration Settings

Teleworkers should also consider their organization's policies regarding application use. For example, many organizations forbid the use of peer-to-peer software and file sharing programs on organization computers because of the increased security risks associated with the software. Teleworkers should remove software that is forbidden by policy from their telework computers to better protect the organization's information. In general, teleworkers should install and use only known and trusted software on their BYOD PCs.

## 5.5.1 Web Browsers

Teleworkers should consider adopting the following recommendations for the web browsers on their BYOD PCs:

- Use a different brand of web browser for telework. Multiple brands of web browsers (e.g., Microsoft Internet Explorer or Edge, Mozilla Firefox, Apple Safari, Google Chrome, Opera, etc.) can be installed on a single PC. Accessing websites containing malicious content is one of the most common ways for PCs to be attacked, such as spyware plug-ins being installed in a browser. To reduce the likelihood that such attacks could impact telework, teleworkers can use one brand of browser for telework only and another brand of browser for all other website access. This separates the telework-related data within one browser from the data within the other browser, providing better protection for the telework data (although this alone cannot adequately secure browser data). Having a separate brand of browser for telework also allows the teleworker to secure it more tightly.

- Block popup windows. Web browsers support the use of popup windows, which are standalone web browser panes that open automatically when a web page is loaded or a user performs an action designed to trigger a popup window. Many popup windows contain advertising, but some are used to attack computers. Some popup windows are crafted to resemble legitimate system message boxes or websites and can trick users into going to phony websites, including sites used for phishing, or authorizing changes to their computers, among other malicious actions. For example, a popup window may tell a user that the computer is infected with spyware and to click on OK to disinfect it. By clicking on OK, the user unwittingly permits spyware or other types of malware to be installed on the computer. To control popup windows, teleworkers should either configure their web browsers to block them or use third-party popup blocking utilities that can block them. Both options prevent popup windows from opening and indicate to the teleworker that a popup window was blocked. If the teleworker did not want the window to be blocked, he or she could then choose to permit that particular popup window or all popup windows from a trusted website, such as the organization's remote access website.

- Enable phishing filter capabilities. Most browsers can detect possible phishing attempts and warn.# Security Recommendations for Teleworkers

## Browser Security

- **Check for Phishing Filters**
The user should check their browser's documentation to see if it offers a phishing filter, and if so, enable it.

- **Remove Unneeded Browser Plug-ins**
A plug-in is a utility that works in conjunction with a web browser to enhance the browser's capabilities. Most plug-ins are beneficial, but some plug-ins are malicious. Teleworkers should periodically review the plug-ins installed in their browsers and uninstall all plug-ins that are unneeded or unknown to the teleworkers. If a necessary plug-in is accidentally uninstalled, the teleworker is usually prompted to download and install it the next time the teleworker accesses content that requires the plug-in.

- **Protect Sensitive Information Stored by the Browser**
Browsers may store sensitive information on behalf of users, such as cached website passwords, digital certificates, and encryption keys. Some browsers have options for strongly protecting this information. Typically, the browser requires a user to enter a master password, which is used solely to protect the sensitive information. Teleworkers should check their browser's documentation to determine if it offers a protection option, and if so, enable it and set a master password.

- **Prevent Website Passwords from Being Recalled Automatically**
Most browsers can save passwords that have been entered into websites. However, many browsers also offer auto-fill or auto-complete options that recall stored passwords and enter them into password text boxes automatically. This could allow someone else who accesses a telework device to gain access to various websites posing as the teleworker. To prevent this, teleworkers should configure their web browsers so that they do not use auto-fill or auto-complete functions for usernames and passwords.

- **Run Web Browsers with the Least Privileges Possible**
Some web browsers can run in a mode that offers low privileges, which means that actions performed within the web browser can affect the computer in very limited ways. This helps prevent some attacks sent through web browsers from succeeding and limits the damage caused by attacks that do succeed. Teleworkers should run their web browsers with the least privileges possible.

- **Use Third-Party Security and Privacy Enhancing Plug-ins**
Such plug-ins can improve the security and privacy of telework in many ways, some of which are specific to a particular type of browser. Examples include preventing active content from running automatically within the web browser, stopping the use of tracking techniques across websites, and blocking advertising content from downloading to the browser.

## Email Clients

Teleworkers should consider adopting the following recommendations for each email client on their BYOD PCs:

- **Limit Mobile Code Execution**
Mobile code is a way for a remote computer, such as a website, to run programs on a teleworker's device. Email messages can carry malicious mobile code that attempts to infect the device from which the messages are read. To prevent infections, most...# Email Clients

Email clients can be configured to permit only the required forms of mobile code (e.g., JavaScript, ActiveX, Java, etc.). Teleworkers should consider disabling mobile code support in their email clients, with the understanding that the full content of certain benign email messages might not be available.

- Set default message reading format and sending format to plain text. Many email clients allow users to specify the default format for reading and sending emails. The most commonly used formats are plain text and Hypertext Markup Language (HTML). Because malware, phishing, and other types of attacks often take advantage of features offered by HTML, it is preferable that the default message format be set to plain text. This will result in emails being displayed as text only, which means that pictures, hyperlinks, and other content provided through HTML would be omitted or displayed only through alternative text. Also, sending emails as plain text is helpful to other security-conscious users who prefer to read email messages in plain text.

- Disable automatic previewing and opening of email messages. Some email-based malware may be activated and infect a computer when the malicious email is previewed or opened. Many email clients can be configured to preview or open email messages automatically. This can provide an easy way for malware to infect a computer. Accordingly, email clients should be configured not to preview or open email messages automatically. This gives teleworkers an opportunity to identify and delete an email that appears to be suspicious, based on the sender, recipient, subject, and other identifying information that can be reviewed without viewing the entire email.

- Enable spam filtering. Section 5.4.3 has additional information concerning this issue.

## 5.5.3 Instant Messaging Clients

Teleworkers should consider adopting the following recommendations for each instant messaging client on their BYOD PCs:

- Suppress the display of email addresses. If the teleworker's displayed name or supporting information includes an email address, this may be harvested by malware or malicious users, then used in future attacks.

- Restrict file transfers. If the software can transfer files with other instant messaging users, it should be configured to prompt the teleworker before permitting a file transfer to begin. File transfers are a common way to transfer malware to other computers and infect them.

## 5.5.4 Office Productivity Suites

Teleworkers should consider adopting the following recommendations for each office productivity suite on their BYOD PCs:

- Restrict macro use. Applications such as word processors and spreadsheets often contain macro languages that certain types of malware use. Most common applications with macro capabilities offer security features that permit macros only from trusted locations or prompt the user to approve or reject each attempt to run a macro. The prompting feature can be effective at stopping macro-based malware threats.```markdown
# CURRENT_PAGE_RAW_OCR_TEXT

- Limit personal information. Many office productivity tools allow personal information, such as name, initials, mailing address, and phone number, to be stored with each document created. Although the most basic information (typically, name and initials) are often needed for collaboration features and edit tracking, information such as mailing addresses and phone numbers is not. Personal information becomes embedded within document files and may inadvertently be distributed with files to others. Teleworkers should not enter any more personal information than necessary into the user settings of office productivity tools. For some word processors, teleworkers can use sanitization utilities that remove personal information from documents, as well as comments, tracked changes, and other information that might be embedded in documents but should not be part of the final document.

- Use secured folders for application files. Most office productivity applications allow users to define default locations for saving documents and holding temporary files, including auto-save and backup copies of documents. This can be very helpful at protecting application files from unauthorized access by others. Teleworkers should also store their custom dictionary entries in a user-specific file stored in one of their protected folders.

## 5.6 Remote Access Software Configuration

As described in Section 2, teleworkers may have to install remote access software onto their BYOD PCs or configure software built into the PC's OS. This software should be configured based on the organization's requirements and recommendations. In many cases, the remote access software will be preconfigured by the organization so that teleworkers do not have to be concerned about configuring it. In general, remote access software should be configured so that only the necessary functions are enabled. Teleworkers should also ensure that whenever updates to the remote access software are available, that they are acquired and installed. If the organization provides the updates, teleworkers should make sure that they will be notified when updates are available.

## 5.7 Security Maintenance and Monitoring

Teleworkers should maintain their BYOD PCs' security on an ongoing basis. Common responsibilities are as follows:

- Confirming periodically that the OS and primary applications are up-to-date. Many software programs have a menu option or other mechanism that displays the update status, such as the number of updates that have not yet been applied or the most recent date the software was updated.

- Checking the status of security software periodically to ensure that it is still enabled, configured properly, and up-to-date. Some operating systems offer security dashboards that show the current status of the security software. Checking the software's status should also include verifying that the regular scans performed by antivirus software have not found any infections on the PC. If an infection is still present, the teleworker should follow the antivirus software's instructions for disinfecting the PC.
```# PC

- Creating a new user account whenever another person needs to start using the PC, as well as disabling or deleting a user account whenever the associated person no longer needs to use the PC. All the user accounts should be reviewed periodically to ensure that only the necessary accounts are enabled.

- Changing the teleworker's PC password regularly in accordance with the organization's password policy.

- Periodically identifying security issues on the PC. Some OSs offer utilities that can be run to check the PC for potential problems. These utilities can identify missing software updates and incorrect security settings and can provide recommendations for fixing problems. However, understanding the reports that these utilities produce and properly implementing recommended solutions can require someone with considerable security expertise. Teleworkers without sufficient expertise should seek expert assistance before implementing any unclear recommendations. Teleworkers also need to investigate any cases in which the PC begins to display unusual behavior. Generally, the best first step is to ensure that the computer's software (especially antivirus software) is fully up-to-date; then, the entire computer should be scanned using the antivirus software. If any malware is detected, it should be removed using the antivirus software; if no malware is detected, then the next step should be to reboot the computer, which clears many errors. If that is ineffective, then additional troubleshooting steps need to be performed. Examples are as follows:

- Checking antivirus manufacturer websites for instances of malware that cause the unusual behavior being seen,

- Uninstalling and reinstalling an application that is not functioning properly,

- Searching the OS manufacturer's website for information on similar problems, and

- Using troubleshooting utilities that can provide insights into what is happening on the PC.

If the problem still cannot be resolved, or the teleworker does not have sufficient knowledge to perform these troubleshooting steps, the teleworker should seek expert assistance, such as contacting the organization's help desk if the organization provides support for BYOD PCs. Teleworkers can assist with troubleshooting by collecting and documenting information regarding the problems. Some OSs provide features that automate this process, and some PC manufacturers install utilities on their PCs designed specifically for this purpose. Teleworkers should consult the PC's hardware and OS manuals for information regarding such features. Teleworkers also should preserve error messages by performing a screen capture, copying and pasting the error message into a file or email, or writing down the error message verbatim on paper. (The appropriate technique should be selected based on the complexity of the error message and the PC's support for performing screen captures, if any.)

## Securing BYOD Telework Mobile Devices

Teleworkers who use BYOD mobile devices for telework, particularly smartphones and tablets, should implement the recommendations presented in this section. Teleworkers who do not# Need to Secure BYOD

Mobile devices can skip this section. A wide variety of mobile devices exist, and the security features available for these devices also vary widely. Some devices offer only a few basic features, whereas others offer sophisticated features similar to those offered by PCs. This does not necessarily imply that more security features are better; in fact, many devices offer more security features because the capabilities they provide make them more susceptible to attack than devices without these capabilities. In general, mobile devices currently face fewer threats than PCs, but threats against mobile devices are increasing. The variety in security features makes it infeasible to create specific recommendations that apply to all mobile devices; therefore, teleworkers should consult the documentation provided by their device manufacturers and service providers (e.g., cellular service) and follow their security recommendations.

## General Recommendations

- **Limit access to the device.** Most mobile devices allow the owner to restrict access by setting a PIN or password; some also support more sophisticated authentication mechanisms, such as biometrics (e.g., the owner's thumbprint). Using some sort of authenticator prevents or deters access to the teleworker's information and service by a person who gains unauthorized physical access to the device. Some devices can also be configured to lock themselves automatically after an idle period; a person attempting to use the device when it is locked must authenticate again to unlock it. PINs and passwords should be changed periodically and whenever teleworkers suspect that someone else may know them. Each PIN or password should be unique and not used elsewhere, either currently or previously, to prevent a PIN or password from being compromised by someone and then used to gain access to additional devices, applications, websites, etc.

- **Disable necessary networking capabilities except when they are needed.** Many mobile devices offer multiple types of networking capabilities, such as IEEE 802.11, Bluetooth, and NFC. Attackers can try to use these capabilities to access information on the device or use the device's services. This can be prevented by disabling each networking capability that is not used, and by enabling necessary capabilities only when they are going to be used. For example, if a person only uses a Bluetooth earpiece occasionally with a smartphone, then the teleworker could enable the smartphone's Bluetooth capability only when the teleworker wants to use the earpiece and disable it when the teleworker is done with the earpiece. Each enabled networking capability increases the risk of successful attacks, so teleworkers should consider the relative risk of each form of networking before enabling it (for example, enabling Bluetooth in a crowded public area is generally riskier than enabling it in a private home).

- **Keep devices updated.** Most mobile devices can be updated or patched to eliminate known security flaws. Devices that support updating may do so directly (e.g., the teleworker).```markdown
# Security Guidelines for Teleworkers

## Updating Devices
Selects an option on the device to get an update or indirectly (e.g., the teleworker downloads a patch onto a PC, and then installs the patch onto the mobile device through a data cable connecting the two). If a device does support updating, teleworkers should follow the provided instructions to ensure that security updates are identified, acquired, and installed regularly, at least weekly. See Section 5.1 for information on acquiring updates through metered networks.

## Configure Applications to Support Security
Many applications on mobile devices, such as web browsers, are often configured by default to favor functionality over security. Accordingly, teleworkers should consider disabling unneeded application features and configuring applications to stop or block activity that is likely to be malicious. Section 5.5 provides configuration recommendations for web browsers, email clients, and instant messaging clients on personal computers; these recommendations should also be applied to mobile devices to the extent possible.

## Download and Run Apps Only from Authorized App Stores
Teleworkers should be cautious about downloading and installing software that is not being provided by either the organization or the device's manufacturer. An example is downloading games from an unfamiliar website. Such software could reduce the security of the device if the software is not configured properly, or the software itself could contain malware that would infect the device. The software could also inadvertently disrupt other applications, including security software.

## Do Not Jailbreak or Root the Device
Doing so disables the manufacturer's built-in security capabilities for the device. This makes the device's use so risky that many organizations automatically check mobile devices attempting to access their networks and services for signs of jailbreaking or rooting, and they deny any access to such devices.

## Do Not Connect the Device to an Unknown Charging Station
Many charging stations enable people to recharge their mobile devices through direct wired connections between a device's USB interface and the charging station. Unfortunately, someone may have altered a charging station, such as one in a public area, so that it attempts to automatically gain unauthorized access to the data, applications, services, and other resources on mobile devices that attach to it.

## Use an Isolated, Protected, and Encrypted Environment
Use an isolated, protected, and encrypted environment that is supported and managed by the organization to access the organization's data and services. If such an environment is available, it is generally automatically generated and maintained on mobile devices so that teleworkers don't need to act. The environment isolates the organization's stored data, applications, and other files on the mobile device so that the organization can maintain control over them without having any access to the teleworker's personal information, files, etc. on the same mobile device. Teleworkers should be cautious about connecting mobile devices to other computers, such as synchronizing data between a smartphone and a PC. Malware could be transmitted from one device to another.
```# Another During a Synchronization

Also, a synchronization could inadvertently cause sensitive information to be transferred from one device to another, and the second device might not be configured to provide adequate protection to that information, putting it at higher risk of exposure. Before connecting a mobile device to another computer, teleworkers should ensure that the mobile device and the computer to which it will be attached have both been properly secured.

## 7. Considering the Security of Third-Party Devices

Teleworkers sometimes want to perform remote access from devices owned by third parties, such as checking email from a kiosk computer at a conference. However, when a third party is responsible for securing a device, teleworkers typically do not know if it has been secured properly. Consequently, a teleworker could perform remote access from a compromised device—for example, one infected with malware intended to steal information from users, such as their passwords or email messages.

Many organizations either prohibit third-party devices from being used for remote access or permit only limited use, such as for webmail. If an organization permits the use of third-party devices for telework, teleworkers should think about the environment of a third-party device before deciding whether or not to use it. There is generally more risk in using third-party BYOD devices than in using teleworker-owned BYOD devices because of uncertainty as to how the third-party devices have been secured; however, some third-party devices are reasonably secured.

Teleworkers should consider who is responsible for securing a third-party device and who can access the device. For example, a kiosk provided at a conference for attendees only is more likely to be reasonably secure than a kiosk in a hotel lobby available to the general public. Whenever possible, teleworkers should not use publicly accessible devices for telework, including remote access to email and other applications.

Teleworkers should avoid using any third-party devices for performing sensitive functions or accessing sensitive information. If a teleworker is not reasonably confident of the security of a third-party device, the teleworker should be cautious and avoid using it. Many teleworkers choose not to use any third-party secured devices for remote access because of security concerns.