NIST Special Publication 1271 August 2021 https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1271 Getting Started with the NIST Cybersecurity Framework: A Quick Start Guide AmyMahn1,JeffreyMarron1,StephenQuinn2,DanielTopper3 1 NIST Applied Cybersecurity Division, Information Technology Laboratory 2 NIST Computer Security Division, Information Technology Laboratory 3 Huntington Ingalls Industries What is the NIST Cybersecurity Framework, and how can my organization use it? TheNISTCybersecurityFramework4canhelpanorganizationbeginorimprovetheircybersecurityprogram. Built off of practices that are known to be effective, it can help organizations improve their cybersecurity posture.Itfosterscommunication amongbothinternalandexternalstakeholdersaboutcybersecurity,and for larger organizations, helps to better integrate and align cybersecurity risk management with broader enterpriseriskmanagementprocessesasdescribedintheNISTIR82865series. TheFrameworkis organizedbyfivekeyFunctions– Identify,Protect,Detect,Respond,Recover. Thesefive widely understood terms, when considered together, provide a comprehensive view of the lifecycle for managing cybersecurity risk over time. The activities listed under each Function may offer a good starting pointforyourorganization: IDENTIFY Develop an organizational ●Maintain hardware and software inventory – understanding to manage It’s important to have an understanding of the cybersecurity risk to: systems, computers and software in your enterprise assets, data, and capabilities. because these are frequently the entry points of malicious actors. This inventory could be as simple as a spreadsheet. ●Identify critical enterprise processes and assets –What are your enterprise’s activities ●Establish policies for cybersecurity that include that absolutely must continue in order to be roles and responsibilities –These policies and viable? For example, this could be maintaining procedures should clearly describe your a website to retrieve payments, protecting expectations for how cybersecurity activities will customer/patient information securely, or protect your information and systems, and how ensuring that the information your enterprise they support critical enterprise processes. collects remains accessible and accurate. Cybersecurity policies should be integrated with other enterprise risk considerations (e.g., ●Document information flows –It’s important to financial, reputational). not only understand what type of information your enterprise collects and uses, but also to ●Identify threats, vulnerabilities, and risk to understand where the data is located and and assets–Ensure risk management processes are how it is used, especially where contracts and established and managed to ensure internal external partners are engaged. and external threats are identified, assessed, and documented in risk registers. Ensure risk 4https://www.nist.gov/cyberframework responses are identified and prioritized, 5 https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/nistir/8286/final executed, and results monitored.PROTECT ●Conduct regular backups –Many operating Develop and implement the systems have built-in backup capabilities; appropriate safeguards to software and cloud solutions are also available ensure delivery of services. that can automate the backup process. A good practice is to keep one frequently backed up set of data offline to protect it against ransomware. ●Manage access to assets and information – ●Protect your devices –Consider installing host- Create unique accounts for each employee and based firewalls and other protections such as ensure that users only have access to endpoint security products. Apply uniform information, computers, and applications that are configurations to devices and control changes needed for their jobs. Authenticate users (e.g., to device configurations. Disable device passwords, multi-factor techniques) before they services or features that are not necessary to are granted access to information, computers, support mission functions. Ensure that there is and applications. Tightly manage and track a policy and that devices are disposed of physical access to devices. securely. ●Manage device vulnerabilities –Regularly update ●Protect sensitive data –If your enterprise stores both the operating system and applications that or transmits sensitive data, make sure that this are installed on your computers and other data is protected by encryption both while it’s devices to protect them from attack. If possible, stored on computers as well as when it’s enable automatic updates. Consider using transmitted to other parties. Consider utilizing software tools to scan devices for additional integrity checking to ensure only approved vulnerabilities; remediate vulnerabilities with high changes to the data have been made. Securely likelihood and/or impact. delete and/or destroy data when it’s no longer ●Train users –Regularly train and retrain all needed or required for compliance purposes. users to be sure that they are aware of enterprise cybersecurity policies and procedures and their specific roles and responsibilities as a condition of employment. DETECT Develop and implement the appropriate activities to identify ●Know the expected data flows for your the occurrence of a enterprise –If you know what and how data is cybersecurity event. expected to be used for your enterprise, you are much more likely to notice when the ●Test and update detection processes –Develop unexpected happens –and unexpected is never and test processes and procedures for a good thing when it comes to cybersecurity. detecting unauthorized entities and actions on Unexpected data flows might include customer the networks and in the physical environment, information being exported from an internal including personnel activity. Staff should be database and exiting the network. If you have aware of their roles and responsibilities for contracted work to a cloud or managed service detection and related reporting both within provider, discuss with them how they track your organization and to external governance data flows and report, including unexpected and legal authorities. events.●Maintain and monitor logs –Logs are crucial in ●Understand the impact of cybersecurity events – order to identify anomalies in your enterprise’s If a cybersecurity event is detected, your enterprise computers and applications. These logs record should work quickly and thoroughly to understand events such as changes to systems or accounts as the breadth and depth of the impact. Seek help. well as the initiation of communication channels. Communicating information on the event with Consider using software tools that can aggregate appropriate stakeholders will help keep you in these logs and look for patterns or anomalies from good stead in terms of partners, oversight bodies, expected network behavior. and others (potentially including investors) and improve policies and processes. RESPOND Develop and implement the ●Coordinate with internal and external appropriate activities to take stakeholders –It’s important to make sure that action regarding a detected your enterprise’s response plans and updates cybersecurity event. include all key stakeholders and external service providers. They can contribute to improvements in planning and execution. ●Ensure response plans are tested –It’s even more important to test response plans to make sure each person knows their responsibilities in executing the plan. The better prepared your organization is, the more effective the response is likely to be. This includes knowing any legal reporting requirements or required information sharing. ●Ensure response plans are updated –Testing the plan (and execution during an incident) inevitably will reveal needed improvements. Be sure to update response plans with lessons learned. RECOVER Develop and implement the appropriate activities to maintain ●Ensure recovery plans are updated –As with plans for resilience and to restore response plans, testing execution will improve any capabilities or services that employee and partner awareness and highlight were impaired due to a cyber- areas for improvement. Be sure to update security event. Recovery plans with lessons learned. ●Communicate with internal and external ●Manage public relations and company stakeholders –Part of recovery depends upon reputation –One of the key aspects of recovery effective communication. Your recovery plans is managing the enterprise’s reputation. When need to carefully account for what, how, and developing a recovery plan, consider how you when information will be shared with various will manage public relations so that your stakeholders so that all interested parties information sharing is accurate, complete, and receive the information they need but no timely –and not reactionary. inappropriate information is shared.