NIST Cybersecurity Framework 2.0: RESOURCE & OVERVIEW GUIDE NIST Special Publication https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1299 NIST SP 1299 February 2024NIST CSF 2.0: RESOURCE & OVERVIEW GUIDE WHAT IS THE CSF 2.0…AND POPULAR WAYS TO USE IT? The NIST Cybersecurity Framework (CSF) 2.0 can help organizations manage and reduce their cybersecurity risks as they start or improve their cybersecurity program. The CSF outlines specific outcomes that organizations can achieve to address risk. Other NIST resources help explain specific actions that can be taken to achieve each outcome. This guide is a supplement to the NIST CSF and is not intended to replace it. The CSF 2.0, along with NIST’s supplementary resources, can be used by organizations to understand, assess, prioritize, and communicate cybersecurity risks; it is particularly useful for fostering internal and external communication across teams — as well as integrating with broader risk management strategies. The CSF 2.0 is organized by six Functions — Govern, Identify, Protect, Detect, Respond, and Recover. Together, these Functions provide a comprehensive view for managing cybersecurity risk. This Resource & Overview Guide offers details about each Function to serve as potential starting points. The CSF 2.0 is comprised of: • CSF Core - A taxonomy of high-level cybersecurity outcomes that can help any organization manage its cybersecurity risks. • CSF Organizational Profiles - A mechanism fordescribing an organization’s current and/or targetcybersecurity posture in terms of the CSF Core’s outcomes. • CSF Tiers -Can be applied to CSFOrganizational Profiles to characterize the rigor of an organization’s cybersecurity risk governance and management practices.NIST CSF 2.0: RESOURCE & OVERVIEW GUIDE EXPLORE MORE CSF 2.0 RESOURCES View and create mappings between CSF 2.0 and other documents. Informative Do you want to submit your mappings to NIST documents and have References them displayed on our site? Please follow the link to the left or email olir@nist.gov if you have any questions. Browse and download the CSF 2.0 Core & mapped content. CPRT Cybersecurity provides a centralized, standardized, and modernized mechanism for & Privacy managing reference datasets (and offers a consistent format for Reference Tool accessing reference data from various NIST cybersecurity and privacy (CPRT) standards, guidelines, and frameworks). View and download notional examples of concise, action-oriented steps Implementation to help achieve the outcomes of the CSF 2.0 Subcategories in addition to Examples the guidance provided in the Informative References. Access human and machine-readable versions of the Core (in JSON and CSF 2.0 Excel). You can also view and export portions of the Core using key Reference Tool search terms. Additional Resources Include: Community ProfilesandProfile templates(help organizations put the CSF into practice) Search tools (simplify and streamline as you look for specific information) Concept papers (learn more about various CSF topics) FAQs (see what others are asking and get answers to top questions) Explore the suite of NIST’s CSF 2.0 Resource RepositoryNIST CSF 2.0: RESOURCE & OVERVIEW GUIDE NAVIGATING NIST’s CSF 2.0 QUICK START GUIDES (QSG) QSG Type Description Explore Provides SMBs, specifically those who have Small Business modest or no cybersecurity plans in place, with See the QSG (SMB) considerations to kick-start their cybersecurity risk management strategy. Creating and Using Provides all organizations with considerations Organizational for creating and using Current and/or Target See the QSG Profiles Profiles to implement the CSF 2.0.​ Explains how any organization can apply the CSF Tiers to Organizational Profiles to characterize Using the CSF Tiers See the QSG the rigor of its cybersecurity risk governance and management practices. Draft Cybersecurity Helps all organizations to become smart Supply Chain Risk acquirers and suppliers of technology products See the QSG Management and services by improving their C-SCRM (C-SCRM) processes. Details how Enterprise Risk Management Draft Enterprise practitioners can utilize the outcomes provided Risk Management See the QSG in CSF 2.0 to improve organizational (ERM) Practitioners cybersecurity risk management. …and more to follow in the future. See the current online QSG repositoryNIST CSF 2.0: RESOURCE & OVERVIEW GUIDE GOVERN IDENTIFY The organization’s cybersecurity risk management The organization’s current strategy, expectations, and policy are established, cybersecurity risks are understood. communicated, and monitored. Understand and assess specific cybersecurity needs. Identify critical business processes and assets. Determine your organization’s unique risks and needs. Consider which of your organization’s activities Discuss the current and predicted risk environment and absolutely must continue to be viable. For example, this the amount of risk your organization is willing to could be maintaining a website to retrieve payments, accept. Seek input and ideas from across the securely protecting customer/patient information, or organization. Understand what has worked or not ensuring that the information critical to your worked well in the past and discuss it openly. organization remains accessible and accurate. Develop a tailored cybersecurity risk strategy.This Maintain inventories of hardware, software, services, should be based on your organization’s specific and systems.Know what computers and software your cybersecurity objectives, the risk environment, and organization uses —including services provided by lessons learned from the past —and from others. suppliers —because these are frequently the entry Manage, update, and discuss the strategy at regular points of malicious actors. This inventory could be as intervals. Roles and responsibilities should be clear. simple as a spreadsheet. Consider including owned, leased, and employees’ personal devices and apps. Establish defined risk management policies.Policies should be approved by management and should be Document information flows.Consider what type of organization-wide, repeatable, and recurring, and information your organization collects and uses (and should align with the current cybersecurity threat where the data are located and how they are used), environment, risks (which will change over time), and especially when contracts and external partners are mission objectives. Embed policies in company culture involved. to help drive and inspire the ability to make informed decisions. Account for legal, regulatory, and contractual Identify threats, vulnerabilities, and risk to assets. obligations. Informed by knowledge of internal and external threats, risks should be identified, assessed, and documented. Develop and communicate organizational Examples of ways to document them include risk cybersecurity practices. These must be straightforward registers –repositories of risk information, including and communicated regularly. They should reflect the data about risks over time. Ensure risk responses are application of risk management to changes in mission identified, prioritized, and executed, and that results or business requirements, threats, and overall technical are monitored. landscape. Document practices and share them with room for feedback and the agility to change course. Lessons learned are used to identify improvements. When conducting day-to-day business operations, it is Establish and monitor cybersecurity supply chain risk important to identify ways to further refine or enhance management. Establish strategy, policy, and roles and performance, including opportunities to better manage responsibilities —including for overseeing suppliers, and reduce cybersecurity risks. This requires purposeful customers, and partners. Incorporate requirements effort by your organization at all levels. If there is an into contracts. Involve partners and suppliers in incident, assess what happened.Prepare an after- planning, response, and recovery. action report that documents the incident, the response, recovery actions taken, and lessons learned. Implement continuous oversight and checkpoints. Analyze risks at regular intervals and monitor them continuously (just as you would with financial risks).NIST CSF 2.0: RESOURCE & OVERVIEW GUIDE PROTECT DETECT Safeguards to manage the Possible cybersecurity attacks organization’s cybersecurity and compromises are risks are used. found and analyzed. Manage access.Create unique accounts for employees Monitor networks, systems, and facilities continuously and ensureusers only have access to necessary to find potentially adverse events. Develop and test resources. Authenticate usersbefore they are granted processes and procedures for detecting indicators of a access to information, computers, and applications. cybersecurity incident on the network and in the Manage and track physical access to facilities/devices. physical environment.Collect log information from multiple organizational sources to assist in detecting Train users. Regularly trainemployees to ensure they unauthorized activity. are aware of cybersecurity policies and procedures and that they have the knowledge and skills to perform Determine and analyze the estimated impact and general and specific tasks;explain how to recognize scope of adverse events.If a cybersecurity event is common attacks and report suspicious activity. Certain detected, your organization should work quickly and roles may require extratraining. thoroughly to understand the impact of the incident. Understanding details regarding any cybersecurity Protect and monitor your devices. Consider using incidents will help inform the response. endpoint security products. Apply uniform configurations to devices and control changes to device Provide information on adverse events to authorized configurations. Disable services or features that staff and tools.When adverse events are detected, don'tsupport mission functions. Configure systems and provide information about the event internally to services to generate log records. Ensure devices are authorized personnel to ensure appropriate incident disposed of securely. response actions are taken. Protect sensitive data. Ensure sensitive stored or transmitteddata areprotected by encryption. Consider utilizing integrity checking so only approved changes are made todata. Securely delete and/or destroy data when no longer needed or required. Manage and maintain software.Regularly update operating systems and applications; enable automatic updates. Replace end-of-life software with supported versions. Consider using software tools to scan devices for additional vulnerabilities and remediate them. Conduct regular backups. Back up data at agreed-upon schedules or use built-in backup capabilities; software and cloud solutions can automate thisprocess. Keep at least one frequently backed-up set of data offline to protect it against ransomware. Test to ensure that backed-up data can be successfully restored to systems.NIST CSF 2.0: RESOURCE & OVERVIEW GUIDE RESPOND RECOVER Actions regarding a detected Assets and operations affected by a cybersecurity incident are taken. cybersecurity incident are restored. Execute an incident response plan once an incident is Understand roles and responsibilities.Understand declared, in coordination with relevant third parties. who, within and outside your business, has recovery To properly execute an incident response plan, ensure responsibilities. Know who has access and authority to everyone knows their responsibilities; thisincludes make decisions to carry out your response efforts on understanding any requirements (e.g., regulatory, legal behalf of the business. reporting, and information sharing). Execute your recovery plan. Ensure operational Categorize and prioritize incidents and escalate or availability of affected systems and services; and elevate as needed. Analyze what has been taking place, prioritize and perform recovery tasks. determine the root cause of the incident, and prioritize which incidents require attention first from your Double-check your work.It is important to ensure the organization. Communicate this prioritization to your integrity of backups and other recovery assets before team and ensure everyone understands who using them to resume regular business operations. information should be communicated to regardinga Communicate with internal and external stakeholders. prioritized incident when it occurs. Carefullyaccount for what, how, and when information Collect incident data and preserve its integrity and will be shared with various stakeholders so that all provenance. Collecting information in a safe manner interested parties receive the information they need, will help in your organization’s response to an but no inappropriate information is shared. incident.Ensure that data are still secure after the Communicate to your staff any lessons learned and incident to maintain your organization’s reputation and revisions to processes, procedures, and technologies trust from stakeholders. Storing this information in a (following policies already set by the organization). This safe manner can also help inform updated and future is a good time to train, or retrain, staff on cybersecurity response plans to be even more effective. best practices. Notify internal and external stakeholders of any incidents and share incident information with them — following policies set by your organization. Securely share information consistent with response plans and information-sharing agreements.Notify business partners and customers of incidents in accordance with contractual requirements. Contain and eradicate incidents. Executing a developed and tested response plan will help your organization contain the effects of anincident and eradicate it. Meaningful coordination and communication with stakeholders can result in a more effective response and mitigation of the incident.U.S. Department of Commerce Gina M. Raimondo, Secretary National Institute of Standards and Technology Laurie E. Locascio, NIST Director and Under Secretary of Commerce for Standards and Technology