NIST Risk Management Framework (RMF) Small Enterprise Quick Start Guide A Comprehensive, Flexible, Risk-Based Approach to Managing Information Security and Privacy Risk U.S. Department of Commerce Gina M. Raimondo, Secretary NIST Special Publication NIST SP 1314 National Institute of Standards and Technology https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1314 Laurie E. Locascio, NIST Director and Under Secretary July 2024 of Commerce for Standards and TechnologyOverview Purpose of this Small Enterprise Quick Start Guide For organizations of all sizes, managing risk (including information security1 and privacy risk) is critical for organizational resilience. This guide is designed to help small, under-resourced entities understand the value and core components of the NIST Risk Management Framework (RMF)2 and provide a starting point for designing and implementing an information security and privacy risk management program. This document is not intended to replace the RMF; it is intended to be an introductory guide to help organizations get started. Risk Management Fundamentals Before we explore the RMF in detail, let’s take a moment to understand risk management broadly. Risk management is a comprehensive process that enables organizations to: • Frame Risk: Establish a risk context by providing a common perspective on how organizations manage risk. A key output is the risk management strategy that addresses risk tolerance, assumptions and constraints, and how the organization intends to assess, respond to, and monitor risk. • Assess Risk: Identify, prioritize, and estimate risk impacts to the organization, operations, and mission/business. Learn more about Conducting Risk Assessments in SP 800-30. • Respond to Risk: Identify, evaluate, decide on, and implement appropriate courses of action to accept, avoid, mitigate, share, or transfer risk. • Monitor Risk: Verify planned risk response measures are implemented, determine the ongoing effectiveness of the risk responses, and continuously monitor risk. The NIST RMF The RMF provides a comprehensive, flexible, repeatable, and measurable seven-step process that organizations can use to manage their unique information security and privacy risks. The RMF can be applied to new and existing systems, any type of system or technology (e.g., Internet of Things, control systems), and within any type of organization regardless of size or sector. 1 Information security, often used interchangeably with the term “cybersecurity,” is the protection of information and systems from unauthorized access, use, disclosure, disruption, modification, or destruction. See full definition. 2 NIST Special Publication (SP) 800-37, Revision 2, Risk Management Framework for Information Systems and Organizations: A System Life Cycle Approach for Security and Privacy. 1 View the full RMF Resource PageOverview The Seven Steps of the RMF Process There are seven steps in the RMF process. All seven steps are required for successful execution of the RMF. The image below lists each step and their respective descriptions. While the process is shown as linear, after initial implementation, organizations can move between steps in any order, as needed. Tying Organizational Mission to Information Security and Privacy Risk Management Information Security and Privacy In our current information age, relying on digital capabilities and data The RMF addresses both information security and privacy. Though processing is essential for achieving organizational missions. This reliance they are distinct disciplines, they can have overlapping and increases potential exposure to information security risks and potential complementary objectives. privacy problems for customers, employees, or even society as a whole. A For example, when your organization processes personally disciplined and structured approach to information security and privacy risk identifiable information (PII), your information security program management enables you to understand, for instance: and privacy program have a shared responsibility for managing the o What information, technologies, people, processes, etc., are the most risks to individuals that may arise from unauthorized access to critical to your organization’s mission? those data. You must keep this in mind when selecting, o What internal or external risks might impede your ability to carry out implementing, assessing, and monitoring appropriate controls. your mission successfully? Note, however, protecting individuals’ privacy cannot be achieved o Who within the organization is accountable for information security and solely by securing PII. privacy risk management success? The risk management processes described in the RMF are equally o What steps are needed to minimize or eliminate the possibility of applicable to security and privacy programs. Learn more about identified risks impeding your mission? this in section 2.3 of the RMF. 2 View the full RMF Resource PagePrepare Getting Started Beginning here, this guide will highlight foundational concepts, tasks, questions, and resources for each step of the RMF. This is not intended to be a comprehensive review of the RMF; it is intended to be introductory. View the full Risk Management Framework for a thorough review of each step. Getting Started Begins with the Prepare Step Beginning with the Prepare Step ensures your organization is ready to execute the RMF process in a practical, efficient, and cost-effective manner to achieve your desired risk management outcomes. Everyone should start with this step and run through the process sequentially for initial implementation. However, as you are monitoring the controls, you have the flexibility to return to other steps in whichever order, and as frequently as necessary. Prepare Step Objectives Key Terminology* ✓ Facilitate better communication between • Outcomes: Cybersecurity and privacy results you leadership and system owners and operators. hope to achieve through implementation of tasks. ✓ Reduce the organization’s information technology (IT) and operational technology • Controls: The countermeasures used to protect the (OT) infrastructure complexity. confidentiality, integrity, and availability of a system ✓ Identify, prioritize, and focus resources on the and its information, or manage privacy risks. organization’s high-value assets that require increased levels of protection. • Risk Management Strategy: Strategy that addresses ✓ Enable system readiness for implementing the risk tolerance and how organizations intend to assess RMF. risk, respond to risk, and monitor risk. *Definitions provided are intended as plain language. Review the NIST Glossary for official NIST definitions. 3 View the full RMF Resource PagePrepare Essential activities to PREPARE the organization to manage security and privacy risks. Foundational Tasks for the Prepare Step Key Terminology* • Designate an individual, or individuals, who will be assigned the task • Authorization Boundary: Components of a system to be of executing the Risk Management Framework. (Task P-1) authorized for operation, essentially the scope of the “system” for Note: Roles and responsibilities may be assigned to personnel internal RMF implementation. Sometimes referred to as “system or external to your organization. boundary” as well. • Risk Tolerance: Level of risk an organization is willing to assume to • Create a risk management strategy for the organization that achieve a potential desired result. articulates your organizational risk tolerance. (Task P-2) • Risk Assessment: Process of identifying risks to operations assets, Note: See the next page for more on risk tolerance. individuals, and other organizations resulting from the operation of a system. • Implement a continuous monitoring strategy for your organization to • System: Combination of interacting elements (such as people, monitor security and privacy risk posture. (Task P-7) processes, technologies, facilities) organized to achieve one or Note: The strategy articulates frequency of control monitoring and how more stated purposes. monitoring is to be conducted. *Definitions provided are intended as plain language. Review the NIST Glossary for official NIST definitions. • Determine the scope of protection for the system and what falls into Questions to Consider that scope. (Task P-11) • How can we better facilitate communication on cybersecurity and Note: See the next page for more on authorization boundaries. privacy risk management to ensure security and privacy • Regularly assess the security and privacy risks at the organization requirements are satisfied, concerns and issues are addressed quickly, and risk management processes are carried out effectively? level and system level. Update risk assessment results on an on-going • As we prepare to implement a risk management strategy, what basis. (Tasks P-3, P-14) expertise do we need to help us achieve our goals? • What are the highest-value assets we should prioritize protecting? Related Resources • RMF Introductory Course • Prepare Step Frequently Asked Questions 4 View the full RMF Resource PagePrepare Getting Started: Risk Management Strategy and Risk Understanding Authorization Boundaries Tolerance The first task is to understand the system, or systems, you are attempting to A r isk management strategy guides and informs risk decisions – protect. A system, as defined on the previous page, is the “combination of interacting elements organized to achieve one or more stated purposes.” For including how risk is framed, assessed, responded to, and monitored – making the risk perceptions used in making instance, a system might be an internet-connected medical device, which inv estment and operational decisions explicit. It helps you: operates in a particular environment, has human interaction, and is a piece of technical machinery. Or, the system might be a process for handling • Understand and document specific assumptions, confidential information—you have a location where you store data; humans constraints, risk tolerances, priorities, and trade-offs. who create, modify, store, and transmit data; and authentication processes to access data. Organizations are made up of multiple systems with different • Make strategic-level decisions on how to manage functions and types of information, and each requires different safeguards for cybersecurity and privacy risk. protection. When you create an authorization boundary, you draw an imaginary line • Define risk tolerance – the level of risk or degree of around the system. Now, you have something you can categorize the risks for uncertainty acceptable to the organization. and can identify appropriate controls for protecting the system. Similarly, Note: There is no “correct level” of risk tolerance. The contracts with vendors will need to document authorization boundaries and degree of risk tolerance is generally based on accountability. What is the scope of their responsibility for protecting assets? organizational culture, could be different for different types of losses or compromises, and can be influenced by risk tolerance of executives. Example: A higher risk tolerance may mean only addressing specific threats that have impacted peers or competitors. Conversely, a lower risk tolerance may require you to address additional threats—meaning you might have to select more (or different) controls to manage risk. Rel ated resources: NIST SP 800-39, Managing Information Security Risk: Organization, Mission, and Information System View. Authorization boundaries establish the scope of systems to be protected, managed, and authorized for operation or use. 5 View the full RMF Resource PageCategorize and Select CATEGORIZE the system and information processed, stored, and transmitted, then SELECT an initial set of controls, or safeguards, to protect the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of your organization’s people, systems, and assets. Fo undational Tasks for the Categorize and Select Steps Key Terminology* • Once you have identified your most important assets, processes, • Control Baseline: A set of controls you can implement to meet and systems, categorize each system based on the impact to the strategic, legal, regulatory, or contractual security and privacy organization if the confidentiality, availability, or integrity were to requirements and manage risk. become compromised. (Task C-2) Note: See the next page for a sample planning table. • Tailoring: The process by which security and privacy control baselines are modified to meet your unique risks and needs. • Now that you have categorized the systems and assets, select the appropriate controls needed for protection. (Task S-1) *Definitions provided are intended as plain language. Review the NIST Glossary for official NIST definitions. Examples: Restricting access to specific information types; cybersecurity and privacy literacy & awareness training; data Questions to Consider encryption. See NIST SP 800-53 for a catalog of security and privacy controls. • What security and privacy controls are needed to satisfy the organization’s security and privacy requirements and to • After selecting an appropriate control baseline, tailor the controls adequately manage risk? to address the specific security and privacy requirements for the • For our initial selection of controls, should we use a baseline organization. (Task S-2) (pre-defined) control selection approach, or should we select our Note: Organizations use risk assessments to guide the tailoring own controls? process. Selected and tailored controls (from Tasks S-1 and S-2) are • How effective are the controls we have implemented? What is documented in a security and/or privacy plan. the frequency in which the controls are monitored? Related Resources • Develop and implement a system-level strategy for monitoring control effectiveness. (Task S-5) • Security and Privacy Controls Introductory Course Note: This strategy defines how changes to the system and • Control Baselines Introductory Course environment of operation are to be monitored, how risk assessments • Categorize Step Frequently Asked Questions are conducted, and the reporting requirements. • Control Baselines for Information Systems and Organizations 6 View the full RMF Resource PageSample Planning Table for Categorization You can use this sample planning table to help you begin to identify your most important assets, processes, and systems, and then categorize each system based on the impact to the organization if the confidentiality, availability, or integrity were to become compromised. The italicized text below is provided to illustrate examples. To learn more, NIST Special Publication 800-60, Vol.1, Rev. 1 provides basic guidelines for mapping types of information and information systems to security categories. System Name: Stored Administrative Information* Overall System Impact: Moderate Information Type Confidentiality Impact (low, Integrity Impact (low, Availability Impact (low, Notes moderate, high) moderate, high) moderate, high) Accounting Low Moderate Low Payments Low Moderate Low Human Resource Strategy Low Low Low Employee Performance Low Low Low Management *Examples taken from NIST SP 800-60, Vol.2, Rev.1 System Name: SCADA (supervisory control and data acquisition) system** Overall System Impact: High Information Type Confidentiality Impact (low, Integrity Impact (low, Availability Impact (low, Notes moderate, high) moderate, high) moderate, high) Sensor Data N/A High High Non-privacy-related Low Low Low administrative data **Examples taken from FIPS Publication 199 • Low Impact: limited adverse effect on organizational operations, asset s, • Availability: Ensuring timely and reliable access to and use of or individuals. information. [44 U.S.C., SEC. 3542] • Moderate Impact: Serious adverse effect on organizational operation s, • Confidentiality: Preserving authorized restrictions on information assets, or individuals. access and disclosure, including means for protecting personal • High Impact: Severe or catastrophic adverse effect on organizat ional privacy and proprietary information. [44 U.S.C., SEC. 3542] operations, assets or individuals. • Integrity: Guarding against improper information modification or • Overall System Impact: The level assigned matches the highest level destruction. [44 U.S.C., SEC. 3542] (low, moderate, or high) for confidentiality, integrity, or availability o f information on the system; also known as the “high-water mark.” 7 View the full RMF Resource PageImplement and Assess IMPLEMENT and document the selected controls, then ASSESS if the controls selected are implemented correctly, operating as intended, and producing the desired outcome with respect to meeting the security and privacy requirements for the system and the organization. Foundational Tasks for the Implement and Assess Steps Key Terminology* • Now that you have categorized systems by their risks and have selected • Control Assessor: The individual, group, or organization appropriate controls, now is the time to implement the controls. (Task I-1) responsible for conducting a control assessment. • Update security and privacy plans to document necessary changes. • Plan of Action and Milestones: A document that identifies tasks (Task I-2) that need to be accomplished. It details resources required to Note: It’s not always feasible to implement controls as planned. Document accomplish the elements of the plan, milestones for meeting necessary revisions that reflect how the control is implemented. See NIST SP the tasks, and the scheduled completion dates for the 800-18 for more guidance. milestones. *Definitions provided are intended as plain language. Review the NIST Glossary for • Select an individual or team responsible for conducting a control official NIST definitions. assessment. (Task A-1) Note: Organizations can conduct self-assessments of controls or obtain the Questions to Consider services of an independent assessor. • Have the security and privacy controls been implemented or is • Develop, review, and approve plans to assess implemented controls. there an implementation plan in place? (Task A-2). • What is the desired or required level of assurance (i.e., confidence) that the selected controls, as implemented, are • Once plans are approved, conduct control assessments using the effective? assessment plans. (Task A-3) Note: NIST SP 800-53A provides an assessment methodology and • If you have controls required (such as through contracts, assessment procedures for the security & privacy controls. agreements, regulations, or supply chain agreements) by an external party, what are their assessment requirements and • Prepare an assessment report documenting the findings and procedures? recommendations, such as plans for correcting deficiencies. (Task A-4) Related Resources • Prepare the plan of action and milestones, which details remediation • Control Baselines Introductory Course plans based on the findings and recommendations of the assessment • Implement Step Frequently Asked Questions report. (Task A-6) • Assessing Security and Privacy Controls Introductory Course 8 View the full RMF Resource PageAuthorize and Monitor A senior organization official determines if security and privacy risk based on operation of the system is acceptable, and if so, AUTHORIZES the system. MONITOR the security and privacy posture of the system and organization. Foundational Tasks for the Authorize and Monitor Steps Key Terminology* • Assemble the authorization package and submit it to the authorizing official • Authorizing Official: A senior executive with the authority to for an authorization decision. (Task R-1) authorize (i.e., assume responsibility for) the operation of an Note: If security and privacy controls are being implemented by an external information system or the use of a designated set of controls at an provider, ensure the provider makes available the information needed for your acceptable level of risk. organization to make risk-based decisions. • Authorization Package: Authorization packages include: o Security and privacy plans • The authorizing official analyzes the information in the authorization package o Security and privacy assessment reports and finalizes the determination of risk to the organization. (Task R-2) o Plans of action and milestones o An executive summary (optional) • The authorizing official issues an authorization decision for the information • Continuous Monitoring Strategy: Strategy to implement system, indicating whether the system is authorized to operate or not. continuous monitoring programs that includes metrics to be (Task R-4) monitored, monitoring and assessment frequencies, analysis and response actions, and reporting requirements. • Monitor the system and environment of operation for changes that impact *Definitions provided are intended as plain language. Review the NIST Glossary security and privacy. (Task M-1). This can include assessing controls on an for official NIST definitions. ongoing basis based on the continuous monitoring strategy. (Task M-2) Questions to Consider Examples: hardware/software upgrades, changes in personnel, changes in facility location, adversarial attacks, etc. • Should we invest in a commercially-available governance, risk, and compliance tool to automate how we prepare, assemble, track, and • Using the results of the ongoing monitoring activities, risk assessments, and share our security and privacy implementation information? outstanding items in plans of action and milestones, determine the • Do our reporting procedures provide leadership the information appropriate risk response and implement. (Task M-3) they need about the organization’s top cybersecurity and privacy risks and how they’re being managed? • Maintain ongoing communication with organizational leadership to convey the current security and privacy posture of the organization. (Task M-5) Related Resources • Authorize Step Frequently Asked Questions • Monitor Step Frequently Asked Questions 9 View the full RMF Resource PageView the Full Risk Management Framework This guide is an introduction to the RMF. View the full RMF and its suite of resources. Questions? Email: sec-cert@nist.gov Additional Resources • RMF Online Introductory Courses • RMF Frequently Asked Questions • Suite of NIST standards and guidelines to support implementation of the RMF • NIST Small Business Cybersecurity Corner 10 View the full RMF Resource Page