NIST Cybersecurity Framework 2.0: Quick-Start Guide for Using the CSF Tiers NIST Special Publication U.S. Department of Commerce NIST SP 1302 Gina M. Raimondo, Secretary https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1302 National Institute of Standards and Technology Please send your comments to cyberframework@nist.gov. Laurie E. Locascio, NIST Director and Under Secretary of Commerce for Standards and Technology October 2024NIST CSF 2.0: USING THE CSF TIERS A QUICK- START GUIDE Cybersecurity Framework (CSF) Tiers Selecting Tiers Selecting the CSF Tiers that your organization should be meeting in its cybersecurity risk CSF Tiers can be applied to CSF Organizational Profiles to characterize the rigor of an governance and management activities is generally performed by organization organization’s cybersecurity risk governance and management outcomes. This can help leadership. provide context on how an organization views cybersecurity risks and the processes in place to manage those risks.​ The Tiers can also be valuable when reviewing processes Here are tips for selecting Tiers: and practices to determine needed improvements and monitor progress made through • Selecting Tiers overall or at the Function or Category level will provide a better sense those improvements. of the organization’s current cybersecurity risk management practices than selecting Appendix B of the CSF contains a notional illustration of the CSF Tiers. ​In that illustration, Tiers at the lower Subcategory level. each Tier has separate descriptions for Cybersecurity Risk Governance (corresponding to • You can use one of the two Tier components (governance or management the Govern Function) and Cybersecurity Risk Management (for the other five CSF descriptions) if you want to focus on a subset of the CSF Functions​. For example, if Functions: Identity, Protect, Detect, Respond, and Recover). your scope is governance only, you can omit the Cybersecurity Risk Management The Tiers capture an organization’s outcomes over a range: Partial (Tier 1), Risk Informed descriptions. (Tier 2), Repeatable (Tier 3), and Adaptive (Tier 4). They reflect a progression from • When selecting Tiers, consider the following aspects of the organization:​ informal, ad hoc responses to approaches that are agile, risk-informed, and continuously • current risk management practices​ improving.​ • threat environment​ • legal and regulatory requirements​ An organization wanting to • information sharing practices​ use the CSF Tiers can reuse the notional descriptions • business and mission objectives​ from Appendix B of the • supply chain requirements ​ CSF. Alternatively, they can • organizational constraints, including resources​ customize those • Ensure that the Tiers being selected help to meet organizational goals, are feasible to descriptions, create new implement, and reduce cybersecurity risks to critical assets and resources to levels ones, or use a set of that are acceptable to the organization.​ descriptions they already have in place. • Progression to higher Tiers is encouraged when needed to address risks or mandates.​NIST CSF 2.0: USING THE CSF TIERS A QUICK- START GUIDE APPLYING TIERS TO ORGANIZATIONAL PROFILES Applying Tiers to Organizational Profiles Once your organization’s Tier selections have been made, you can use them to help inform your Current and Target Profiles. ​ For example, if leadership has determined that your organization should be at Tier 2 (Risk Informed) for the Identify and Protect Functions, then your Current Profile would reflect how well the Tier 2 Cybersecurity Risk Management characteristics are currently being achieved for each CSF Category within those two Functions. Similarly, the Target Profile would reflect any improvements to Identity and Protect outcomes Additional Resources needed to fully achieve the Tier 2 description. ​The table excerpt below shows the relevant part of the Tier 2 description. • Quick-Start Guide for Tiers should be used toguide and informan organization’s cybersecurity riskgovernance and management methodologies ratherthan take Creating and Using their place. Organizational Profiles (includes taking CSF Tiers into account in Current and Cybersecurity Cybersecurity Tier Target Profiles) Risk Governance Risk Management Tier 1: Partial ... … • Organizational Profile notional template Tier 2: Risk … There is an awareness of cybersecurity risks at the organizational level, but an organization-wide Informed approach to managing cybersecurity risks has not been established. • A Guide to Creating CSF 2.0 Consideration of cybersecurity in organizational objectives and programs may occur at some but Community Profiles not all levels of the organization. Cyber risk assessment of organizational and external assets (includes using CSF Tiers to occurs but is not typically repeatable or reoccurring. inform the development of Community Profiles) Cybersecurity information is shared within the organization on an informal basis. The organization is aware of the cybersecurity risks associated with its suppliers and the products and services it acquires and uses, but it does not act consistently or formally in response to those risks. Tier 3: Repeatable … … Tier 4: Adaptive … …