NIST Cybersecurity Framework 2.0: Quick-Start Guide for Creating and Using Organizational Profiles U.S. Department of Commerce NIST Special Publication Gina M. Raimondo, Secretary NIST SP 1301 National Institute of Standards and Technology https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1301 Laurie E. Locascio, NIST Director and Under Secretary of Commerce for Standards and Technology February 2024NIST CSF 2.0: CREATING AND USING ORGANIZATIONAL PROFILES A QUICK START GUIDE I NT RO DUC T I O N Drive Progress Over Time Drive Progress Over Time with Organizational Profiles An Organizational Profile describes an organization’s current and/or target cybersecurity posture in terms of cybersecurity outcomes from the Cybersecurity Framework (CSF) Core. Organizational Profiles are used to understand, tailor, assess, and prioritize cybersecurity outcomes based on an organization’s mission objectives, stakeholder expectations, threat landscape, and requirements. The organization can then act strategically to achieve those outcomes. These Profiles can also be used to assess progress toward targeted outcomes and to communicate pertinent information to stakeholders. Organizational Profiles can be categorized as: • A Current Profile that specifies the CSF outcomes an organization is currently achieving and characterizes how or to what extent each outcome is being achieved. • A Target Profile that specifies the desired CSF outcomes an organization has selected and prioritized for achieving its cybersecurity risk management objectives. A Target Create and Use Organizational Profiles Profile considers anticipated changes to the organization’s cybersecurity posture, such as new requirements, new technology adoption, and trends in threat intelligence. Create and Use Organizational Profiles with the CSF Five-Step Process CSF 2.0 describes a five-step process for creating and using Organizational Profiles. More specifically, the process compares an aspirational Target Profile to an assessed Current Profile. Then, a gap analysis is performed, and an action plan is developed and implemented. This process naturally leads to refinements in the Target Profile to be used during the next assessment.NIST CSF 2.0: CREATING AND USING ORGANIZATIONAL PROFILES A QUICK START GUIDE S CO P E T HE O RGANI ZATI O NAL P RO F I L E The scope defines the high-level facts and assumptions on which the Profiles will be based. You can have as many Organizational Profiles as desired, each with a different scope. Questions to answer as you scope your Profile include: • What’s the reason for creating the Organizational Profile? • Will the Profile cover the entire organization? If not, which of the organization’s divisions, data assets, technology assets, products and services, and/or partners and suppliers will be included? • Will the Profile address all types of cybersecurity threats, vulnerabilities, attacks, and defenses? If not, Organizational Profile Facts which types will be included? • Which individuals or teams will be responsible for developing, reviewing, and operationalizing the Profile? Ways to Think about Profiles • Who will be responsible for setting expectations for actions to achieve the target outcomes? A given organization may wish to use several Profiles. Each Profile can have a distinct scope based on factors like: Human End User Manufacturing Resources • technology category (IT, OT) IT Systems Floor OT Systems IT Systems • data types (PII, PHI, PCI) • users (employees, third-parties) The scope of a Profile determines the Third-Party Systems Using Systems with applicability of a given CSF outcome. IT Systems Artificial Design It may be helpful to combine two or more Intelligence Information Profiles when scopes overlap.NIST CSF 2.0: CREATING AND USING ORGANIZATIONAL PROFILES A QUICK START GUIDE GAT HER NEEDED I NFO R M AT IO N Examples of information may include organizational policies, risk management priorities and resources, cybersecurity requirements and standards... The sources of information needed will depend on the use case, the elements that the Profiles will capture, and the level of detail desired. Common sources of information include: 1. Community Profiles A Community Profile is a baseline of CSF outcomes created and published to address shared interests and goals Prioritization among a number of organizations. A Community Profile is typically intended for a particular sector or subsector, The Defining Feature of a Profile technology, threat type, or other use case. The central notion of a Target Profile is to An organization can use a Community Profile as the basis for its own Target Profile by copying the Community determine differing priorities for applicable Profile into an Organizational Profile. A Community Profile can be adapted by: CSF outcomes. Priorities help you determine • Adjusting the priorities of particular CSF outcomes parts of your cybersecurity program that • Adding organization-specific Subcategories, Informative References, or implementation guidance should be resourced more, or less. Cybersecurity priorities are driven by See A Guide to Creating CSF 2.0 Community Profilesfor more information on creating and using Community strategic objectives, laws, regulations, and Profiles. risk responses. To learn more, see SP 800-37 2. NIST Organizational Profile Template about organization-wide risk management NIST provides a CSF Organizational Profile template as a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet. You can download it and tasks in the Prepare Step. IR 8286B fill it in to create Current and Target Profiles for your organization. The template facilitates side-by-side offersinformation about how the CSF Core comparison of Current and Target Profiles to identify and analyze gaps. You can find the template on the CSF 2.0 supports risk response decisions. website.NIST CSF 2.0: CREATING AND USING ORGANIZATIONAL PROFILES A QUICK START GUIDE CREATE THE ORGANIZATIONAL PROFILE – PART 1 Determine what types of supporting information each Profile should include for the selected CSF outcomes... Steps for creating an Organizational Profile are: 3a: Download the latest CSF Organizational Profile template spreadsheet and customize as desired. 3b: Include cybersecurity outcomes that apply to your use case, and document rationales as needed. 3c: Document current cybersecurity Practices in the Current Profile columns. More detailed entries may provide better insights for later steps. 3d: Document cybersecurity Goalsand the plans for achieving them in the Target Profilecolumns. Entries may be based on CSF Informative References, new cybersecurity requirements, new technologies, and trends in cyber threat intelligence. 3e: Note the importance of each Goal using the Priority field. CSF Outcomes Current Profile Target Profile Identifier Description Practices Status Rating Priority Goals The identifiers and descriptions from the CSF Policies, processes, The current state or An assessment or evaluation of The relative importance Such as: Core –Functions, Categories, Subcategories. procedures and condition of an current practices using scales of an outcome using • Policies, Processes, and You can also add your own outcomes to other activities outcome, such as such as: scales such as: Procedures address your organization’s unique risks and related to an whether it is being • high/medium/low • Low/Medium/High • Roles and Responsibilities requirements. outcome. May achieved and to what • 1-5 • 1/2/3/4/5 include artifacts that degree. • 0-100%, • rankings (1, 2, 3…) Selected from: contain evidence of • red/yellow/green • Informative References - achieving an standards, guidance, and outcome. best practicesNIST CSF 2.0: CREATING AND USING ORGANIZATIONAL PROFILES A QUICK START GUIDE CREATE THE ORGANIZATIONAL PROFILE – PART 2 The table below shows a notional example of a single row from an Organizational Profile. This is meant for illustrative purposes only. Here are some tips drawn from the example: • Add and remove columns from the Organizational Profile template to suite your needs. The CSF encourages users to record whatever information is significant and to use whatever format they prefer. • The columns do not have to be the same for the Current Profile and the Target Profile. • Include Informative References to understand differences between Practices and Goals. This example shows controls in the square brackets. SP 800-53 CSF Outcomes Current Profile Target Profile Identifier Description Practices Status Rating Priority Goals PR.PS-01 Configuration Policy: Configuration Management Configuration 3 High Policy: The Configuration Management policy requires management policy version 1.4, last updated management is partially out of 5 configuration baselines to be specified, used, enforced, and practices are 10/14/22. Defines the configuration implemented within the maintained for all commodity technologies used by the established and change control policy [CM-1]. organization. Some organization. The policy requires change control processes to be applied systems do not follow followed for all technologies within the organization [CM-1]. Procedures: System owners and available baselines and technology managers informally Procedures: Each division of the organization has a configuration other systems do not have implement configuration management management plan [CM-9], as well as maintains, implements, and baselines, so they may practices. Change control processes enforces configuration baselines [CM-2] and settings [CM-6] for have weak configurations are not consistently followed. The CIO their systems. Baselines are applied to all systems before that make them more specifies configuration baselines production release. All systems are continuously monitored for susceptible to misuse and [CM-2] for the IT platforms and unexpected configuration changes, and tickets are automatically compromise. Unauthorized applications most widely used within generated when deviations from baselines occur. Designated changes may go the organization, but baseline use is parties review change requests and corresponding impact undetected. Some changes not monitored or enforced analyses [CM-4] and approve or deny each [CM-3]. are not tested or tracked. consistently across the organization.NIST CSF 2.0: CREATING AND USING ORGANIZATIONAL PROFILES A QUICK START GUIDE ANALYZE GAPS AND CREATE AN ACTION PLAN – PART 1 Identifying and analyzing the differences between the Current and Target Profiles enables an organization to find gaps and develop a prioritized action plan for addressing those gaps. Using Profiles in this manner helps your organization make better-informed decisions about how to improve cybersecurity risk management in a prioritized and cost-effective manner. Step 4a Target Step 4b • Core outcome description How to Analyze Gaps Goals How to Create Action Plans • Informative References Compare and contrast your • Implementation Examples The action plan is a list of Current current practices, across pending improvementsfor people, process, and • action your cybersecurity program. technology, to the best • priority In addition to the Improvements practices described in CSF • owner Organizational Profile gap outcome descriptions, • deadline analysis, the action plan • resources Informative References, and should consider mission Implementation Examples. Current drivers, benefits, risks, and With those goalsin mind, necessary resources (e.g., • people make observations about Practices staffing, funding). Action • process differences and document plans should have all the • technology those items as candidate essential items in the graphic improvements. (left).NIST CSF 2.0: CREATING AND USING ORGANIZATIONAL PROFILES A QUICK START GUIDE ANALYZE GAPS AND CREATE AN ACTION PLAN – PART 2 Identifying and analyzing the differences between the Current and Target Profiles enables an organization to find gaps and develop a prioritized action plan for addressing those gaps. The CSF provides links to tools, controls, and implementation resources that will help you with analyzing gaps [Step 4a] and creating action plans [Step 4b]. A recommended approach for developing action plans is to use the NIST CSF 2.0 Reference Tool to follow the references from your Target Profile’s pertinent Subcategories to the associated NIST SP 800-53 controls. Example of an Implementation Example How to Implement Best Practices An Excerpt from the NIST CSF 2.0 Reference Tool What Best Practices to Use Implementation Examples: notional Informative References: relationships descriptions of ways CSF outcomes can be between the Core and various best fulfilled. The examples are not a practices, including standards, guidelines, comprehensive list of all actions that could regulations, and other resources. Implementation Examples be taken by an organization, nor are they a References help inform how an Ex1: Establish, test, deploy, and maintain hardened baseline of required actions; they are organization may achieve the CSF baselines that enforce the organization's cybersecurity helpful ideas to get organizations thinking outcomes. They also help connect desired policies and provide only essential capabilities (i.e., about concrete steps. The NIST CSF 2.0 outcomes to other common cybersecurity principle of least functionality) Reference Tool allows users to explore documents, such as ISO/IEC 27001 and the full CSF 2.0 Core and download in Excel Ex2: Review all default configuration settings that may SP 800-53 which provides a catalog of and JSON formats. potentially impact cybersecurity when installing or security and privacy controls. upgrading softwareNIST CSF 2.0: CREATING AND USING ORGANIZATIONAL PROFILES A QUICK START GUIDE IMPLEMENT ACTION PLAN AND UPDATE PROFILE Step 5a Implementing Action Plans fulfilled The Action Plan is fulfilled through any with combination of management, programmatic, and technical controls. As those controls are implemented, the Organizational Profile can be used to track implementation status. Step 5b Subsequently, controls and associated risks Updating Your Profile can be monitored through Key Performance Implementactivities that follow your Action Plan Indicators (KPI) and Key Risk Indicators (KRI). are a part of an ongoing cyber risk management Cyber risks that fall beyond Risk Tolerance program (feedback loops and lines of are observed through Risk Assessments. communication more nuanced than shown). Risk Risks beyond Risk Tolerance may prompt Assessments, as described in SP 800-30 can updates to the Action Plan, Organizational leverage Risk Tolerance statements when Profile, and/or Risk Tolerance statements. identifying risks, as well as determining likelihood Gap Analysis may also result in the creation and impact of those risks. The changing likelihood of POA&M for gaps that will take a longer and impact are a measure of the effectiveness of remediation timeline. More information the Action Plan and the discrete controls. Risk about KPI, KRI, Risk Tolerance, and POA&Ms causes monitoring is also performed using KPI and KRI. can be discovered in IR 8286B and update of Changes in risks, likelihoods, and/or impacts may SP 800-37 . all result in updates to the Organizational Profile. * Risk Assessment can occur at any time and can inform any stepNIST CSF 2.0: CREATING AND USING ORGANIZATIONAL PROFILES A QUICK START GUIDE NEXT STEPS What We Learned. This QSG explained the following terms: Organizational Profile – CSF Core outcomes relevant for a specific organization Community Profile – CSF Core outcomes that apply to multiple organizations Current Profile – the cybersecurity outcomes that an organization is currently achieving Target Profile – the desired outcomes an organization wants to achieve Learning More Gap Analysis – determining the differences between the Current and Target Profiles Reading Informative References – best practices that implement various CSF Core outcomes Implementation Examples – notional ways organizations can achieve CSF Subcategories NIST IR 8286B, Prioritizing Cybersecurity Risk for IR 8286B Enterprise Risk Management Action Plan – address gaps and move toward the Target Profile NIST SP 800-37 Revision 2, Risk Management Framework SP 800-37 for Information Systems & Organizations What’s Next.Here’s a list of things you can do to move this QSG into practice: NIST SP 800-53 Revision 5, Security and Privacy Controls • Familiarize yourself with the NIST CSF Organizational Profile template SP 800-53 for Information Systems & Organizations • See if there is a Community Profile relevant for you at the NIST Community Profiles SP 800-30 NIST SP 800-30 Revision 1, Guide for Conducting Risk site Assessments • Determine how many CSF Organizational Profiles you need [Step 1] Resources • Inventory your cybersecurity requirements Organizational Profile Template NIST CSF 2.0 Reference Tool • Prioritize CSF outcomes in your Organizational Profiles [Step 2] Informative References Implementation Examples • Assess your Current Profile [Step 3] A Guide to Creating CSF 2.0 Community Profiles • Read more about Informative References Quick-Start Guide for Using the CSF Tiers • Improve your cybersecurity program over time [Steps 4 & 5]