NIST Cybersecurity Framework 2.0: Quick-Start Guide for Cybersecurity Supply Chain Risk Management (C-SCRM) U.S. Department of Commerce NIST Special Publication Gina M. Raimondo, Secretary NIST SP 1305 National Institute of Standards and Technology https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1305 Laurie E. Locascio, NIST Director and Under Secretary of Commerce for Standards and Please send your comments to cyberframework@nist.gov. Technology October 2024NIST CSF 2.0: CYBERSECURITY SUPPLY CHAIN RISK MANAGEMENT (C-SCRM) A QUICK- START GUIDE INTRODUCTION TO C-SCRM Use the CSF to Improve Your C-SCRM Processes The CSF can help an organization become a smart acquirer and supplier of technology products C-SCRM Overview and services. This guide focuses on two ways the CSF can help you: All types of technology rely on a complex, globally 1. Use the CSF’s GV.SC Category to establish and operate a C-SCRM capability. distributed, extensive, and interconnected supply 2. Define and communicate supplier requirements using the CSF. chain ecosystem. Cybersecurity Supply Chain Risk Management (C-SCRM) is a systematic process for managing exposure to cybersecurity risk throughout supply chains and developing appropriate response What is the supply chain ecosystem? strategies, policies, processes, and procedures. The supply chain ecosystem is composed of public and private sector entities — including C-SCRM practitioners identify, assess, and mitigate acquirers, suppliers, developers, system integrators, external system service providers, and other cybersecurity risks throughout the supply chain at all technology-related service providers — that interact to research, develop, design, manufacture, levels of their organizations associated with acquire, deliver, integrate, operate, maintain, dispose of, and otherwise utilize or manage information and communications technology (ICT) technology products and services. products and services. Potential risks include Consider a laptop with hardware subcomponents (like the graphics processor, random-access malicious functionality, counterfeit devices, or memory, or network interface card) sourced from different countries and third-party vulnerabilities derived from poor manufacturing and manufacturers, and subject to distinct supply chain interactions. That laptop also contains development practices within the supply chain. software (and firmware) developed by different companies and people. How do we manage risk Effective C-SCRM requires stakeholders across the for complex ICT devices with multiple components? enterprise to actively collaborate, communicate, and In today's interconnected world, the supply chain ecosystem includes other third parties such as take actions to secure favorable C-SCRM outcomes. business partners and various data and digital service providers. Practices in this QSG can be applied to manage cybersecurity risks from such relationships as well.NIST CSF 2.0: CYBERSECURITY SUPPLY CHAIN RISK MANAGEMENT (C-SCRM) A QUICK- START GUIDE HOW TO USE THE CSF TO ESTABLISH AND OPERATE A C- SCRM CAPABILITY Establishing a C-SCRM Capability Checklist of actions for Activity 1: Create a C-SCRM strategy, objectives, policies, and processes. The CSF has a Category within its Govern Function dedicated to C-SCRM: the Cybersecurity Supply Chain Risk Management (GV.SC) Category. GV.SC contains the key outcomes that every Establish a C-SCRM strategy that lays out the objectives of the capability. organization should achieve through its C-SCRM capability. Additionally, many of the ☐ subcategories within the remainder of the CSF can be used to identify and communicate C- Develop a C-SCRM plan (with milestones) and C-SCRM policies and procedures ☐ SCRM-related requirements internally for organizations and for their vendors. that guide implementation and improvement of the plan and the capability; socialize those policies and procedures with organizational stakeholders. Perform these activities to establish your organization’s C-SCRM capability: Develop and implement C-SCRM processes based on the strategy, objectives, ☐ Activity 1: Create a C-SCRM strategy, objectives, policies, and processes. [GV.SC-01] policies, and procedures that are agreed upon and performed by the organizational stakeholders. Activity 2: Identify your organization’s technology suppliers and determine how critical each one is to your organization. [GV.SC-04] Establish a cross-organizational mechanism that ensures alignment between ☐ functions that contribute to C-SCRM management, such as cybersecurity, IT, Activity 3: Establish C-SCRM roles and requirements and communicate them within and legal, human resources, engineering, etc. outside your organization. This includes identifying C-SCRM roles and responsibilities [GV.SC- 02] and C-SCRM requirements [GV.SC-05]. Checklist of actions for Activity 2: Identify your organization’s technology suppliers and determine how critical each one is to your It is also important to coordinate and harmonize activities between your C-SCRM capability organization. and other internal capabilities. Here are a few examples: Develop criteria for supplier criticality based on, for example, the importance of ☐ • Integrate C-SCRM into cybersecurity and enterprise risk management, risk assessment, and the supplier’s products or services to the organization’s business, sensitivity of improvement processes, and monitor the performance of C-SCRM practices throughout the data processed or stored by the supplier, and degree of access to the technology lifecycle. [GV.SC-03, GV.SC-09] See the Enterprise Risk Management Quick-Start organization’s systems. Guide for more information on C-SCRM integration. Prioritize suppliers into criticality levels based on the criteria. See NIST IR 8179, ☐ • Include your relevant suppliers in cybersecurity incident planning, response, and recovery Criticality Analysis Process Model: Prioritizing Systems and Components for more activities. [GV.SC-08] See NIST’s Computer Security Incident Handling Guide for more information on a structured method for prioritization. information on key practices for cybersecurity incidents. Keep a record of all suppliers, prioritized based on the criticality criteria. ☐NIST CSF 2.0: CYBERSECURITY SUPPLY CHAIN RISK MANAGEMENT (C-SCRM) A QUICK- START GUIDE HOW TO USE THE CSF TO ESTABLISH AND OPERATE A C- SCRM CAPABILITY Checklist of actions for Activity 3: Establish C-SCRM roles and C-SCRM requirements: requirements and communicate them within and outside your Establish security requirements for suppliers, products, and services commensurate ☐ organization. with their criticality and potential impact if compromised. Include all cybersecurity and supply chain requirements that suppliers must follow and ☐ C-SCRM roles and responsibilities: how compliance with the requirements may be verified in default contractual language. Identify one or more specific roles or positions that will be responsible and Define the rules and protocols for information sharing between the organization and its ☐ ☐ accountable for planning, resourcing, and executing C-SCRM activities. suppliers and sub-tier suppliers in contracts. Document C-SCRM roles and responsibilities in policy. Include security requirements in contracts based on their criticality and potential ☐ ☐ Create responsibility matrixes (e.g., RACI charts) to document who will be impact if compromised. ☐ responsible, accountable, consulted, and informed for C-SCRM activities and how Define security requirements in service level agreements (SLAs) for monitoring ☐ those teams and individuals will be consulted and informed. suppliers for acceptable security performance throughout the supplier relationship lifecycle. Include C-SCRM responsibilities and performance requirements in personnel ☐ descriptions to ensure clarity and improve accountability. Specify in contracts the rights and responsibilities of the organization, its suppliers, and ☐ their supply chains with respect to potential cybersecurity risks. Contractually require Document performance goals for personnel with C-SCRM responsibilities, and ☐ suppliers to do the following: periodically measure them to demonstrate and improve performance. Develop roles and responsibilities for suppliers, customers, and business partners ☐ disclose cybersecurity features, functions, and vulnerabilities of their products and ☐ services for the life of the product or the term of service to address shared responsibilities for applicable cybersecurity risks and integrate them into organizational policies and applicable third-party agreements. provide and maintain a current component inventory (e.g., software or hardware ☐ bill of materials) for critical products Internally communicate C-SCRM roles and responsibilities for suppliers. ☐ vet their employees and guard against insider threats Establish rules and protocols for information sharing and reporting processes ☐ ☐ between the organization and its suppliers. provide evidence of performing acceptable security practices through, for example, ☐ self-attestation, conformance to known standards, certifications, or inspectionsNIST CSF 2.0: CYBERSECURITY SUPPLY CHAIN RISK MANAGEMENT (C-SCRM) A QUICK- START GUIDE HOW TO USE THE CSF TO DEFINE AND COMMUNICATE SUPPLIER REQUIREMENTS Developing Supplier Requirements Examples of CSF Categories and Subcategories that are likely to include requirements for suppliers An organization should specify requirements for Govern: Protect: technology suppliers. Robustness of these • Organizational Context: Legal, regulatory, and • Identity Management, Authentication, and Access Control: requirements should correspond to supplier criticality. contractual requirements regarding cybersecurity — Identities and credentials for authorized users, services, and Organizations can use two different methods for including privacy and civil liberties obligations — are hardware are managed by the organization [PR.AA-01] specifying supplier requirements: understood and managed [GV.OC-03] • Awareness and Training: Individuals in specialized roles are provided • Roles, Responsibilities, and Authorities: Roles, with awareness and training so that they possess the knowledge and 1. Use CSF Categories and Subcategories. Not all responsibilities, and authorities related to skills to perform relevant tasks with cybersecurity risks in mind Categories and Subcategories will apply to all cybersecurity risk management are established, [PR.AT-02] suppliers. You can pick and choose requirements that communicated, understood, and enforced [GV.RR- fit your mission or business supplier criticality level. Detect: 02] Select requirements for suppliers based on their • Continuous Monitoring: Personnel activity and technology usage are criticality and your mission or business. To do that, • Cybersecurity Supply Chain Risk Management: monitored to find potentially adverse events [DE.CM-03] review the list of CSF Categories and Subcategories, Cyber supply chain risk management processes are Respond: and determine which ones will be applicable to identified, established, managed, monitored, and • Incident Management: Incidents are escalated or elevated as needed suppliers within each of the criticality levels, based on improved by organizational stakeholders [GV.SC] [RS.MA-04] the risk appetite for each supplier criticality level. Identify: • Incident Response Reporting and Communication: Internal and When considering individual supplier agreements, • Risk Assessment: The authenticity and integrity of external stakeholders are notified of incidents [RS.CO-02] determine if additional supplier requirements are hardware and software are assessed prior to needed based on existing criticality criteria, such as acquisition and use [ID.RA-09]; Critical suppliers are Recover: your mission or business, data type being processed, assessed prior to acquisition [ID.RA-10] • Incident Recovery Plan Execution: The integrity of backups and other or digital product or service being provided. • Improvement: Improvements are identified from restoration assets is verified before using them for restoration [RC.RP-03] security tests and exercises, including those done in 2. Create CSF Target Profiles for Each Supplier Criticality Level. The next page explains how to coordination with suppliers and relevant third • Incident Recovery Communication: Recovery activities and progress parties [ID.IM-02] in restoring operational capabilities are communicated to designated express supplier requirements for each supplier internal and external stakeholders [RC.CO-03] criticality level.NIST CSF 2.0: CYBERSECURITY SUPPLY CHAIN RISK MANAGEMENT (C-SCRM) A QUICK- START GUIDE HOW TO USE THE CSF TO DEFINE AND COMMUNICATE SUPPLIER REQUIREMENTS Create Target Profiles to Communicate Supplier Requirements by Supplier Criticality Level Follow these steps to create Target Profiles for communicating C-SCRM requirements to your suppliers. 1. Scope the Target Profile. Decide which of your supplier criticality levels it will apply to, and determine any other restrictions to be placed on the Profile’s scope, such as suppliers of a particular type of product or service only. You can create as many Target Profiles as you need to specify the requirements for all of your suppliers. Additional resources for creating Target Profiles 2. Select the CSF Categories to include. Identify which CSF Categories and Subcategories correspond to your requirements, and only include those Categories and Subcategories in the Target Profile. • Quick-Start Guide for Creating and Using Organizational Profiles (including Target Profiles) 3. Determine what types of information to include in your Target Profile. Target Profiles are flexible and can contain whatever types of information you want to communicate to your suppliers. The notional Profile excerpt below • A Guide to Creating CSF 2.0 Community Profiles captures each selected Category’s and Subcategory's relative priority, the internal practices that the supplier must (Community Profiles have much in common with follow, and references to additional sources of information on achieving the Category and Subcategory. creating Target Profiles for numerous suppliers to follow) 4. Fill in the columns, and share the Target Profile. Once the contents of the Target Profile have been internally • Quick-Start Guide for Using the CSF Tiers (to help inform reviewed and finalized, it can be shared with your suppliers as your set of C-SCRM requirements for them. creation of Target Profiles) Target Selected Informative Selected CSF Outcomes Target Internal Practices • Enterprise Risk Management Quick-Start Guide Priority References PR.PS, The hardware, software (e.g., High 1. Configure platforms to allow the installation • NIST SP 800-161r1, firmware, operating systems, of organization-approved software only. control SI-3 applications), and services of physical 2. Verify the source of new software and the • ISO 27002:2022, and virtual platforms are managed software’s integrity before installing it. control 8.7 consistent with the organization’s risk 3. Configure platforms to use only approved • … strategy to protect their confidentiality, DNS services that block access to known integrity, and availability malicious domains. 4. ... …NIST CSF 2.0: CYBERSECURITY SUPPLY CHAIN RISK MANAGEMENT (C-SCRM) A QUICK- START GUIDE NEXT STEPS What We Learned. This QSG explained the following: New to C-SCRM? What Is C-SCRM – a systematic process for managing exposure to cybersecurity risk throughout Here are some NIST resources that can help you get up to speed on the basics supply chains of C-SCRM and support you in establishing and operating your C-SCRM What Is a Supply Chain Ecosystem – public- and private-sector entities that interact to create, capability: deliver, operate, and manage technology products and services • Key Practices in Cyber Supply Chain Risk Management: Observations from How to Establish and Implement a C-SCRM Capability – by using the CSF 2.0 C-SCRM Category Industry (NIST IR 8276) summarizes practices foundational to an effective C- (GV.SC) SCRM capability. How to Develop and Communicate Supplier Requirements – by using the CSF Categories and Subcategories or by creating Target Profiles • Cybersecurity Supply Chain Risk Management Practices for Systems and Organizations (NIST SP 800-161 Revision 1) guides organizations in identifying, assessing, and responding to supply chain risks at all levels. It is What’s Next. Here’s a list of things you can do to move this QSG into practice: flexible and builds on an organization’s existing cybersecurity practices. • Review all NIST CSF 2.0 Categories and Subcategories Also, Appendix A identifies the C-SCRM-related controls from NIST SP 800- • Develop C-SCRM strategy, objectives, policies, and processes [Activity 1] 53r5 and augments those controls with additional supplemental guidance, as well as providing new controls as appropriate. • Identify your organization’s technology suppliers [Activity 2] • Determine how critical each technology supplier is to your organization and prioritize your • Criticality Analysis Process Model: Prioritizing Systems and Components suppliers [Activity 2] (NIST IR 8179) provides information on prioritizing suppliers by criticality • Establish C-SCRM roles and requirements [Activity 3] levels. • Communicate C-SCRM roles and requirements within and outside your organization, • The Software and Supply Chain Assurance Forum provides a venue for including to technology suppliers [Activity 3] government, industry, and academic participants from around the world to share their knowledge and expertise regarding C-SCRM, supply chain risks, This QSG provides an overview of C-SCRM and how it relates to the CSF. effective practices and response strategies, tools and technologies, and any Organizations implementing C-SCRM capabilities should not rely solely on gaps related to the people, processes, or technologies involved. this QSG and should consult the additional documents referenced within. • NIST’s C-SCRM Program website contains links to additional resources.