404 NBS SPECIAL PUBLICATION U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COIVTMERCE / National Bureau of StandardsNATIONAL BUREAU OF STANDARDS The National Bureau of Standards' was established by an act of Congress March 3, 1901. The Bureau's overall goal is to strengthen and advance the Nation's science and technology and facilitate their effective application for public benefit. To this end, the Bureau conducts research and provides: (1) a basis for the Nation's physical measurement system, (2) scientific and technological services for industry and government, (3) a technical basis for equity in trade, and (4) technical services to promote public safety. The Bureau consists of the Institute for Basic Standards, the Institute for Materials Research, the Institute for Applied Technology, the Institute for Computer Sciences and Technology, and the Office for Information Programs. THE INSTITUTE FOR BASIC STANDARDS provides the central basis within the United States of a complete and consistent system of physical measurement; coordinates that system with measurement systems of other nations; and furnishes essential services leading toaccurate and uniform physical measurements throughout the Nation's scientific community, industry, and commerce. The Institute consists of a Center for Radiation Research, an Office of Meas- urement Services and the following divisions: — — — — — Applied Ma —thematics Electricit—y Mechanics Heat —Optical Physics —Nuclear Sciences° App —lied Radiation ' Quantum —Electronics^ Electromagnetics" Time and Frequency" Laboratory Astrophysics" Cryogenics^. THE INSTITUTE FOR MATERIALS RESEARCH conducts materials research leading to improved methods of measurement, standards, and data on the properties of well-characterized materials needed by industry, commerce, educational institutions, and Government; provides advisory and research services to other Government agencies; and develops, produces, and distributes standard reference materials. The Institute consists of the Office of Standard Reference Materials and the following divisions: — — — — Analytical—Chemistry Polymers Metallurgy Inorganic Materials Reactor Radiation Physical Chemistry. THE INSTITUTE FOR APPLIED TECHNOLOGY provides technical services to promote the use of available technology and to facilitate technological innovation in industry and Government; cooperates with public and private organizations leading to the development of technological standards (including mandatory safety standards), codes and methods of test; and provides technical advice and services to Government agencies upon request. The Institute consists of a Center for Building Technology and the following divisions and offices: — — Engin—eering and Product Standards W—eights and Measures I—nvention and Innova- —tion Product Evaluation Tec —hnology Electronic Technology Technic—al Analysis Measuremen —t Engineering Structures, Materials, a —nd Life Safety* Building Environment ' Technical Evaluation and Application* Fire Technology. THE INSTITUTE FOR COMPUTER SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY conducts research and provides technical services designed to aid Government agencies in improving cost effec- tiveness in the conduct of their programs through the selection, acquisition, and effective utilization of automatic data processing equipment; and serves as the principal focus within the executive branch for the development of Federal standards for automatic data processing equipment, techniques, and computer languages. The Institute consists of the following divisions: — — — Computer Services Systems and Software Computer Systems Engineering Informa- tion Technology. THE OFFICE FOR INFORMATION PROGRAMS promotes optimum dissemination and accessibility of scientific information generated within NBS and other agencies of the Federal Government; promotes the development of the National Standard Reference Data System and a system of information analysis centers dealing with the broader aspects of the National Measurement System; provides appropriate services to ensure that the NBS staff has optimum accessibility to the scientific information of the world. The Office consists of the following organizational units: — — Office of Stan —dard Referen —ce Data Office of Information Activities Office of Technical Publications Library Office of International Relations. 'Headquarters and Laboratories at Gaiihersburg, Maryland, unless otherwise noted; mailing address Washington, D.C. 20234. Part of the Center for Radiation Research. ''Located at Boulder, Colorado 80302. Part of the Center for Building Technology.Approaches To PRIVACY and SECURITY COMPUTER in Proceedings of a Conference Held at the National Bureau of Standards March 4-5, 1974 Clark R. Renninger, Editor Institute for Computer Sciences and Technology National Bureau of Standards Washington, D.C. 20234 U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE, Frederick B. Dent, Secretary NATIONAL BUREAU OF STANDARDS, Richard W. Roberts, Direcfor Issued September 1974National Bureau of Standards Special Publication 404 Nat. Bur. Stand. (U.S.), Spec. Publ. 404, 84pages (Sept. 1974) CODEN: XNBSAV U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE WASHINGTON: 1974 For sale by the Superintendent ofDocuments, U.S. Government Printing OflBce, Washington, D.C. 20402 (Order by SD Catalog No. C13.10:404). Price $1.45Foreword This second conference on Privacy and Security in Computer Systems completes the initial step in what we hope will be a continuing process whereby all responsible and interested groups will work cooperatively in dealing with the complex issues of privacy and data confidentiality. The National Bureau of Standards is grateful to all those who responded to this opportunity for identifying governmental needs for safeguarding personal and valuable information and suggesting approaches for meeting these needs. We are especially heartened by the broad spectrum of organi- zations who participated in these conferences: legislators, governmental agencies at the Federal, State and local levels, public interest groups, the computer industry, professional associations and societies, universities, trade associations, and individual citizens. We believe this demonstration of interest on the part of so many persons and organizations indi- cates not only a deep concern for the problems of privacy and data confidentiality, but also the promise of accelerated attention to the development of sound legislative policies, administrative procedures and technological safeguards by which these problems can be resolved. RUTH M. DAVIS Director Institute for Computer Sciences & Technology iiiAbstract This publication summarizes and contains the proceedings of a conference held at the National Bureau of Standards on March 4-5, 1974 to continue the dialog in search of ways to protect confi- dential information in computer systems. Proposals are presented for meeting governmental needs in safeguarding individual privacy and data confidentiality that were identified at a conference held in November 1973. Among the proposals are the enactment of privacy legislation, improved computer system architecture and access controls, information and security management guidelines and the development of a systematic, balanced approach to system security. The proposals were presented by legislators, citizens, computer industry associations and com- panies, professional societies, and public interest groups. Key words: Computer systems; confidentiality; privacy; privacy and security; security. iv: : Contents Foreword Abstract of the Report iv Purpose of the Conference vii Summary of the Conference vu Conference presentations: INTRODUCTION Welcoming Address: Richard W. Roberts 1 Opening Address: Betsy Ancker-Johnson 1 LEGISLATION TO SAFEGUARD PRIVACY The Privacy Issue: Arthur R. Miller 2 Current Legislative Proposals in Congress: Edward I. Koch 3 Current Legislative Proposals in Congress: Barry M. Goldwater, Jr. 5 A Citizen's View of the Privacy Issue: Jane L. Hardaway 6 The Issues of Privacy and Computer Security Within the State of Ohio Stanley J. Aronoff 8 The Issues of Privacy and Computer Security Within the State of California: Mike Cullen 10 TheIssuesofPrivacyand ComputerSecurityWithin theStateofMassachusetts Arthur R. Miller 14 INDUSTRY VIEWS The Views of the Computer and Business Equipment Manufacturers Association (CBEMA) Peter F. McCloskey 16 : A Call for Non-Proprietary Security Systems: August C. W. Biddle 19 The Views of the Association of Data Processing Service Organizations: John B. Christiansen 21 PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATION VIEWS The Professional Aspects of Privacy and Confidentiality: Robert W. Rector 22 Data Processing Management Association Statement on Privacy and Security in Computer Systems: Donn W. Sanford 25 A SYSTEMATIC APPROACH TO DATA SECURITY A Systematic Approach to Data Security: R. L. Thomas and Robert H. Courtney 26 SECURITY IN COMPUTER NETWORKS Peter S. Browne 32 COMPUTER SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE AND ACCESS CONTROLS Oliver R. Smoot, Chairman of Panel 37 Security Architecture Using Encryption Richard R. Keys and : Eric H. Clamons 37 Access Controls in Burroughs Large Systems: Harvey W. Bingham 42 Systems Architecture for Security and Protection: James P. Anderson 45 Pragmatic Approaches to Software Security: Richard L. Caplan 50 INFORMATION AND SECURITY MANAGEMENT Joseph F. Cunningham, Chairman of Panel 53 Risk Analysis in Planning for Physical Security: Robert V. Jacobson 54Page Security Considerations in Information Systems Design: Steven B. Lipner 55 Auditing Current Systems: Donn B. Parker 59 OPEN FORUM The Medical Patient's Right to Privacy: Lois A. Bowden 62 Confidentiality of the Medical Record: Margaret Beard 63 Model Legislation Brian Backus 63 : On Information Files and People: Mark P. Kriger 64 The Need for Privacy Legislation Robert H. Long 65 : The Administrative Burdens of Privacy Legislation: Edwin I. Golding 66 CONFERENCE RESULTS Ruth M. Davis 67 — Appendix A Conference Program 69 — Appendix B Executive Summary, Conference on Privacy and Security in Com- puter Systems, November 19-20, 1973 70 viPurpose of the Conference The second of two national conferences on Privacy and Security in Computer Systems was held at the National Bureau of Standards on March 4-5, 1974, to continue the dialog in search of ways to safeguard con- fidential information in automated systems. The first conference, held in November, 1973, featured governmental spokesmen who described the nreds and problems of Federal, state and local agencies in protecting confidential and valuable data from loss or mis- use while at the same time providing free access to information concerning the public's business.' The second conference provided the opportunity for persons or organizations to offer views and proposals on how these governmental issues might be resolved. The conference was attended by 376 persons: 265 from government and 111 from the private sector. The attendees represented four congressional offices, 36 Federal agencies, 23 states, six municipalities, 33 computer companies or consulting organizations, three trade associations, and 20 professional associations, universities and public interest groups. Total registration at both conferences was886. In his welcoming remarks. Dr. Richard W. Roberts, Director, National Bureau of Standards, observed that this broad spectrum of interest was demon- strative recognition that all groups must work together in harnessing the highly automated information systems that serve so many areas of our society. Dr. Betsy Ancker-Johnson, Assistant Secretary for Science and Technology, Department of Commerce, noted that the President's February 23, 1974, statement on the American Right to Privacy accentuated the crucial nature of the privacy issue and the urgency of purpose represented by the conference objectives. Summary of the Conference Introduction The privacy issue has come of age. According to Arthur R. Miller, Professor of Law at Harvard Law School, extensive legislative and judicial activities at all levels of government and the President's appointment of a Committee on the Right of Privacy make it clear that this problem of the intersection between the rights of people and the need to maximize the utility of a vibrant technology has now achieved legitimacy in our society. The time for action is at hand. The clamor for action has come none too soon for Jane L. Hardaway, Commissioner, Department of Per- sonnel, Tennessee. Speaking as an individual citizen, Mrs. Hardaway expressed her deep concerns over the trend toward increased fact gathering and the threats to personal privacy that may result from intentional or careless misuse of such information. Questions that urgently need answers, she said, are: "What power should the government have in fact gathering and what power should the government haveto protect its citizens from other potential threats to personal privacy? What rights do the citizens have for protection against governmental abuses, and finally, what restraints of law should be applicable to all levels of government for the protection of those rights?" Special pleas for the protection of the privacy rights of medical patients were made by Margaret C. Beard, American Medical Record Association, and Lois A, Bowden, American Hospital Association. In their view, increasing pressures for the release of medical information for educational, research, administrative and other needs require that legislation must assure the patient of the confidentiality of personal and sensitive information which he shares with health care professionals. t thh ee t^ Si uA tl pn e erGE iox nve tec eru nt dni emv nee tntS ofu Lm o Dom oka csr uy ma et no tf P sr ,ith ve a Wc ayN so hav ine nd gm tb S oe e nr c ,ur1 i D9 t .7 y C3 .iC n 2o 0n C 4f o 0e m 2r pe un (tc Cee ar ti as lS oya gst tt Ca e 1c m 3h se :d 4( 6N :a Bs 80S 9A )p T ,p ee c pn h rnd iii cc ex al 8B 6. No cT t eh ne te s8 .0c 9om )p .l Te hte e pr ue bp lo ir ct ath ia os n b me ae yn bp eub ol ri ds eh re ed du fn rd oe mr viiLegislative Proposals The protective measures sought by a concerned citizenry are now being actively considered by the Congress with a growing sense of urgency. "If there is any legislation," said Congressman Edward I. Koch (N.Y.), "that I believe requires the sup- port of everyone . . . it's legislation to ensure the right of privacy." His specific proposals include H.R. 12206 and H.R. 12207 which provide for persons to be apprised of records concerning them which are maintained by government agencies; and H.R. 9786 which basically would apply the same provisions to all data banks identi- fiable to individuals. Congressman Barry M. Goldwater, Jr. (Calif.) alsourged congressional action, declaring that it is not enough to discuss the technology of the computer and speak of privacy in an abstract fashion. "We must resolve," he said, "to do what is necessary to protect our constitutional right to privacy." Specifically, he proposed consider- ation of his bill H.R. 11275 which sets forth a code of fair information practices, based on the report entitled, "Records, Computers and the Rights of Citizens," released in July 1973 by HEW's Advisory Committee on Automated Personal Data Systems. Other Goldwater proposals would limit the use of the Social Security Number, allow consumers to inspect credit records, protect individuals from statistical reporting systems and establish a select committee on privacy. (Editor's note: Subsequent to the Conference, Congressmen Koch and Goldwater cosponsored a new bill, H.R. 14163 to define information practices to be followed with respect to personal data files maintained by both the government and the private sector.) At the State level, legislative activity in the general field of data protection is also intensifying. Assembly- man Mike Cullen (California), noting that California voters responded to the issue of privacy in 1972 by amend- ing the State constitution to declare privacy as an inalienable right of all persons, described several legislative and administrative measures already taken by the State to safeguard that right, including its current considera- tion of a proposal (Bill No. 2656) to establish a code of fair information practices. Professor Miller recited similar types of activities underway in Michigan, Minnesota, Massachusetts and numerous other States. State Senator Stanley J. Aronofl (Ohio) took note of the proliferation of legislative activity across the country and suggested that the Code of Fair Information Practices bill which he introduced into the Ohio General Assembly should become the model for all privacy legislation in the 50 States. "Because of the ability — — of computers to talk to each other city to city. State to State ," said Senator Aronoff, "I think it is important to develop as much uniform legislation as we can. That way, a person has a better chance to know and under- stand his rights no matter where he lives." The need for uniform legislation to avoid the burden and confusion of a mass of conflicting requirements was a constant theme by speakers throughout the Conference. A specific proposal for addressing this problem was advanced by Brian Backus, representing the Government Management Information Sciences organization who called attention to a joint effort with the National Association of State Information Systems to develop model legislation for the consideration of all States. Not everyone was convinced that legislative controls over personal data systems are necessary, however. Speaking during the Open Forum, Mr. Robert H. Long, Director of ACT, Bank Administration Institute, ques- tioned whether there was sufficient evidence of privacy violations to warrant the registration and monitoring of automated personal data systems. "The way to protect privacy and confidentiality," he declared "is to improve the procedures of redress, not to attempt to control every personal data file at a governmental level." Dr. E. I. Golding, Office of Law Enforcement, Department of the Treasury, added the caution that before laws are enacted, indepth consideration should be given to coping with the administrative burdens that could result from carrying out the law. "They could be horrendous," Mr. Golding said. In concluding the discussion of legislative proposals. Professor Miller noted that many of the proposals now appearing are technologically unsound, administratively unworkable, or placebos that offer the people no real protection. "The important single role for governmental policymakers," he said, "is to help the legislators find a mid-course between the extremes; otherwise, we will wind up with bad legislation." viiiIndustry Implications Striking a proper balance between the protection of personal privacy and the provision of efficient govern- ment services was a concern also expressed by computer industry spokesmen. Peter F. McCloskey, President, Computer and Business Equipment Manufacturer's Association, offered the suggestion that satisfactory resolution of the issue must be approached from a systems viewpoint in which the sparable issues of privacy, confidenti- ality and data security are addressed in interrelated fashion. He said that the prolifieration of diverse legislative proposals "dramatically points up the need for a clear understanding of the benefits versus the cost trade-offs to be obtained." Unfortunately, according to John Christiansen, speaking for the Association of Data Processing Service Organizations (ADAPSO), the bills proposed to date for accomplishing the commendable goal of safeguarding personal information "demonstrate an ignorance of the specific economic characteristics and problems of the computer industry. Especially, the potential costs of compliance could be disastrous for the small, independent data processing service companies. ADAPSO urges an intensified effort to provide greaterknowledge of the issues, costs and consequences before embarking on legislation or regulation." The Computer Industry Association is concerned that the technological development of secure data process- ing systems represents a complex, expensive and time consuming undertaking that exceeds the human and financial resources available to all but the largest of the manufacturers. Further, A. G. W. Biddle, Executive Director of the Association, believes that the independent development of security technology by only one or a few of such suppliers would be detrimental to the user, the public and the industry as a whole. To avoid these consequences, Mr. Biddle suggested that serious consideration should be given to the creation of a federally chartered non- profit "Super Underwriters Laboratory," charged with the responsibility for developing and disseminating tech- nological solutions to the data security problem. In pursuing this approach, said Mr. Biddle, "We will increase the likelihood that secure systems can be available on a timely and economic basis. It certainly represents an improvement over a dozen noncompatible proprietary solutions." Contributions of Professional Societies No technological advance is effective without a sense of professional responsibility among the people involved. Thus, there is a compelling need, said Robert W. Rector, Executive Director of the American Federation of Infor- mation Processing Societies, for the computer professional to exert his influence upon solving the problems of privacy and security. According to Mr. Rector, the principal motivation for the professional societies' interest in privacy is protection of the general public welfare and its function of promoting professional objectives through education. Examples of the societies' educational activities were cited by Joseph F. Cunningham, Executive Director, Association for Computing Machinery. The ACM has cooperated with the National Bureau of Standards in spon- soring a workshop on the technical aspects of controlling access to computer systems and in planning for the provision of guidance on procedures for data security in selected public services. Donn W. Sanford, Executive Director, Data Processing Management Association, warned against hastily developed privacy procedures or laws which could be as onerous as the ills they seek to rectify. Expressing full DPMA support of a positive, balanced and realistic approach to the privacy issue, Mr. Sanford revealed that a newly drafted "Standards of Ethical Professional Practice Regarding Individuals' Rights of Privacy" is under consideration for early adoption. Computer System Architecture and Access Controls While solutions for safeguarding the privacy of individuals are to be found in legislative or regulatory proposals, solutions for protecting confidential data in automated systems are found in technological safeguards and procedures through which access to the systems mav be controlled. The major computer architecture approaches to providing these safeguards, according to James P. Anderson of the James P. Anderson Company, are based on the fundamental principle of isolation ; i.e., providing mecha- nisms for isolating data that cannot be bypassed by the users of the system. These approaches include: ix• virtual machines systems: creating an isolated environment through techniques which have the effect of creating for each user a complete system dedicated solely to his purposes. This approach is perhaps most applicable in service center operations where hardware resources are shared among different organizations, each with a need to protect their information from others. • descriptor-based systems: creating an isolated environment through techniques which provide the authorized user with unbounded memory space unaccessible to others. This approach is most applicable in on-line time sharing or "utility" systems where there is a major requirement for sharing programs or data. Both of the above approaches must be augmented with mechanisms for identifying users and authorizing their access to the system. The architecture of current Burroughs large-scale systems anticipated the requirement for safe sharing of resources among users and provides many access controls to resist penetration. Harvey Bingham, Burroughs Corporation, said that software language barriers provides cross checks against errors. These controls may be further specialized to meet particular user needs. Achieving security in computer networks is a greater challenge than achieving it in stand-alone systems. Even so, according to Peter S. Browne, General Electric Company, an adequate level of security in networks is possible with today's technology. The necessary conditions are minimum standards for physical protection, oper- ational procedures, and audit. True network security, however, can only be achieved through modifications to systems software/hardware which, Mr. Browne explained, are not available in today's commercial systems. A crucial issue in networking, as seen by Mr. Browne, is the capability to encrypt (code) data for trans- mission, a subject addressed more specifically by Richard R. Keys, Honeywell. In Mr. Keys' view, data en- cryption can increase the protection of data when used as part of a secure environment, but the technique by itself is not sufficient to protect a system. Better, faster encryption techniques and speedier, less costlier circuits are needed. Fortunately, Mr. Keys said, we are by no means at the end of our technological capability; but since encryption technology is a specialty of governments, the ultimate success of security architecture using encryption will depend on the willingness of the appropriate government agencies to help develop the algorithms needed to satisfy the design criteria of data processing machines. Secure software also plays an essential role in data security which is too often overlooked. Using case exam- ples, Richard L. Caplan, Advanced Computer Techniques Corporation, showed how, by focusing attention on improvements in the testing of user-created programs as well as the structuring and control of technical docu- mentation, significant improvements in computer system security can be achieved. A Systematic Approach to Data Security In a joint presentation, R. L. Thomas and Robert H. Courtney, IBM Corporation, suggested that an effec- tive security system must include the total environment: physical and procedural safeguards as well as those provided by hardware and software. Otherwise, unnecessary layering of security measures and high costs will result. The selection of those measures which, in balanced combination, provide the desired security at least cost should be determined by a systematic analysis of the reasons why there is concern for the safety of data (e.g., human errors, dishonest employees, fire) and upon an assessment of the probabilities of such occurrences and the consequences that will result. Mr. Courtney focused his discussion on the merits and problems of security measures in four classifications: identification, authorization, audit and system integrity. Addressing the question of general guidelines for the design of hardware to eliminate potential data security problems, Mr. Courtney said that such guidelines can never replace continuous detailed review of the design of each specific product for potential problems, because it is impossible to conceive in advance all ofthe problems that might occur. Although the demand for data security is growing, Mr. Thomas noted that customers still rank computer security features below other considerations, such as price, performance and other special capabilities. "It is our feeling," he said, "that the awareness and identification of the needs of security will increase in the future. And although certain tools and techniques are available today, we feel it would be wrong for the industry to wait until that demand becomes pressing before taking the necessary steps to meet the problem." X: Information and Security Management Guidelines The handling of security in a computer-based information system is at best a difficult problem. But deferring consideration of security issues has never been shown to be a viable way of handling the problem. Steven B. Lipner, the Mitre Corporation, suggested that the designer is best served by addressing security as he designs the system, building security measures into his design, and attempting to eliminate those problems he cannot solve. In designing an information system that handles sensitive information, he said, assessments of threat and vulner- ability are basic. Mark Kriger, Harvard University, cautioned that system designers must also be wary of the "information flashpoint" at which separately maintained nonconfidential data may suddenly become confidential when merged. In making assessments of threats and vulnerabilities, reliance on ritual is too often substituted for rational thought. Robert V. Jacobson, the Sentor Security Group, Inc., suggested that the first step in a rational approach is to definecomputer system security as • protection against losses caused by delays in completing assigned data processingtasks • protection of assets against loss, theft or misuse By analyzing security needs on this basis, it can be clearly seen which are the most significant threats and which have the greatest potential for loss. From this information, security measures can be focused on areas of greatest need, a reasonable level of security expenditures can be determined and a foundation for security audit can be formed. The security audit function thus is viewed as an integral part of the security management process. It pro- vides a review of the adequacy and effectiveness of the security measures that have been put in place and points toward improvements that are needed. Current auditing methods, however, generally reflect a lack of awareness of the vulnerabilities associated with computers, explained Donn B. Parker, Stanford Research Institute, because newer technologies are causing basic changes in the operational methods, the occupations of people and the scope of the functional activity to be protected. To solve this problem, he said, it is necessary to develop and document good practices for auditors which match the advancement of systems they must audit. Next Steps This Conference and the initial Conference held in November 1973 will have served their purpose if they lead to action-oriented programs which can ease the problems of data confidentiality and computer security. Noting the wide spectrum of actions proposed by the Conference participants. Dr. Ruth M. Davis, Director, Institute for Computer Sciences and Technology, National Bureau of Standards, summarized these as follows: • enact cohesive privacy legislation at the national and State levels of government which gives proper con- sideration to the administrative, technological and cost impacts of compliance. • develop and apply an effective balance of managerial, administrative and technological measures in safe- guarding data confidentiality. • enlarge the educational activities needed to improve understanding of the privacy, data confidentiality and computer security issues. • stimulate research and development of technological safeguards in the private sector by providing legislative policies, standards and security requirements. • determine costs of data confidentiality as a basis for decision and allocation among those who must bear the expense. Implied by these broad categories of action are numerous activities for which no single group or organiza- tion in either the public or private sector has total responsibility. Progress will depend upon the initiatives taken by all those who bear specific responsibilities or can contribute uniquely to achieving privacy and data confiden- — tiality the Congress and State legislatures, government agencies, program managers, computer and related in- dustries, professional and trade associations, and public interest organizations. The Conferences have confirmed the complexity of the problem and the difficulties in providing solutions. But, said Dr. Davis, "I think, happily, we're now entering the productive stage. We're now talking rationally and reasonably. We have heard people give very thoughtful and deliberate approaches to the problem. We're going to make every attempt to get the views expressed here to all of those people to help them carr)' out their responsibilities." xiWELCOMING ADDRESS Richard W. Roberts Director, National Bureau of Standards Washington, D.C. 20234 I am pleased to welcome all of you to this second People responsible for implementing data confiden- conference on privacy and computer security. Our tiality requirements are also represented. The Com- purpose here is to continue the dialogue we started in puter and Business Equipment Manufacturers Associ- November in search of ways to preserve the privacy ation, the Computer Industry Association, and the As- of individuals. This task is many-sided. Today and sociation of Data Processing Service Organizations tomorrow we will consider ways of harnessing the are with us, as are numerous computer companies and highly automated information systems that serve so consulting organizations. many areas of our society. Professional societies have always been regarded as In order for that assessment to be meaningful, peo- a valuable source of assistance in national problems ple at all levels must work together. In this way the having a strong technical orientation. Members of the products of research, present and future, can yield American Federation for Information Processing So- the maximum benefit. cieties, the Data Processing Management Association, By participating in this conference, you show that and the Association for Computing Machinery have you recognize the need for coordinated effort. The come to offer their insights. essential link between legislative and technological We believe that the diversity of views presented safeguards is attested to by the presence this morning during these next two days can make this conference of two members of Congress and two State legislators: useful and productive. We at NBS are happy to be Congressman Edward Koch Congressman Barry Gold- your hosts and are pleased to make our facilities avail- ; water, Jr.; State Senator Stanley Aronoff; and Assem- able for your meeting. I know that those responsible blyman Mike Cullen. Each is actively sponsoring an for this conference, in particular Dr. Davis and Mr. important legislative proposal in the field of privacy, Renninger, will try their best to make your visit a and they have come to share their time and views pleasant one. with us. And now I would like to present to you the Honor- Two people known for their concern with the privacy able Betsy Ancker-Johnson, Assistant Secretary of of individuals. Professor Arthur Miller of Harvard, Commerce for Science and Technology. and Mrs. Jane L. Hardaway have consented to provide commentary on these and other legislative needs and activities. OPENING ADDRESS Honorable Betsy Ancker-Johnson Assistant Secretary for Science and Technology Department of Commerce, Washington, D.C. 20230 On behalf of the Department of Commerce, I am Second, applying existing technology to enhance especially pleased to greet you. We welcome your computer security in present systems; participation in this effort to help resolve the issues Third, insuring that the necessary new technology of privacy and security in computer systems, and we is developed to satisfy growing security needs; are happy to provide resources for your work. I know Fourth, establishing uniform management and tech- it is a great pleasure for Dr. Richard W. Roberts, Di- nical procedures for effecting security measures; rector of our National Bureau of Standards, to host this And, finally, developing and implementing a mecha- second conference on privacy and security in com- nism for allocating the costs of computer security puter systems. among public, industrial, and government sectors. Our first conference in this continuing series iden- We are here at this second conference to learn your tified major issues related to free access to information proposals for resolving any conflict between full appli- in connection with the public's business. cation of computer technology and the protection of The primary governmental concerns identified at the personal privacy. Personal privacy is one of our most November conference were: valuable yet vulnerable rights. As Americans from the First, achieving national coherence among laws de- Pilgrims on, we demand the right to control the col- fining both individual rights of privacy and the basic lection of personal information about ourselves. In information practices to be followed in protecting these fact, the Pilgrims were essentially seeking privacy by rights; coming to America in the first place. One utterly con- 1sistent, enduring characteristic of the people compris- Several years ago the Department, recognizing the ing w —hat an earlier generation described as a "melting critical importance of computer security, formed a pot" whether these people be native Americans, de- special computer security program as a priority com- scendants of the Pilgrims, or mo —re recent arrivals from ponent of its Institute for Computer Science and Tech- whatever corner of the world is our insistence on nology (ICST). controlling the use of personal information about our- President Nixon's recent statement stressed the cru- selves. cial nature of this issue and his formation of a special We know that information concerning over 150 Domestic Council committee on the right of privacy million Americans is now in computer banks scattered greatly emphasized the important work that Dr. Ruth across the country. "Until the day comes when science Davis, Director of ICST, has already well underway. finds a way of installing a conscience in every com- The President has charged the committee with recom- puter, we must develop human, personal safeguards mending "direct, enforceable measures" which can be that prevent computers from becoming huge, mechani- put into immediate effect to provide a personal shield cal, impersonal robots that deprive us of our essential for every American's sense of privacy. These recom- liberties," as President Nixon said in his address on mendations are due within four months, let us all note. the American Right of Privacy, February 23rd. Secretary of Commerce Frederick Dent, who is pleased We in the Department of Commerce have been deal- to be one of the ten members on this committee, will ing with computer technology issues since the middle be especially well prepared to contribute because he of the century. It was then that the National Bureau has all of you helping him. of Standards built one of the first electronic computers, And so we see that our conference issues have been SEAC (the Standards Eastern Automatic Computer). accorded the highest level stature and priority. Our Our computer programs at NBS are charged with three urgency of purpose in gathering today and tomorrow major responsibilities: to seek viable computer security measures couldn't be First, developing mandatory Federal automatic data greater. processing standards; Both Secretary Dent and I are committed to the Second, providing consulting services in the com- goals of this conference. We are eagerto hear and work puter field for Federal agencies, and on your output. Third, undertaking research in computer science and technology. THE PRIVACY ISSUE Arthur R. Miller Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138 A special word of thanks for the hospitality of the nology and social planning based on personal infor- Department of Commerce in sponsoring this second mation. conference. Those of us who have been working in the So it is with joy that in early 1974 we can announce privacy field since the proposal for the national data that the privacy issue has come of age. The events of center emerged in 1966 and 1967 realize what a tre- the last year as well as the proposals put forward mendous maturation process has occurred in the six during the last year all make it clear that this problem years since that time. In those days the issue of com- of the intersection between the rights of people and puters and privacy was a highly emotional issue. The the need to maximize the utility of a vibrant tech- metaphors of those days were "Womb to Tomb" dos- nology has achieved a legitimacy in our society that siers, "1984," "computer infallibility," society becom- was undreamed of in 1967 when two sides stood across ing a glass house. From the computer enthusiasts on the river and threw rocks at each other. In the past the other side of the dispute, we kept hearing such year we have had the publication of the Department things as social planning, solving the problems of a of Health, Education, and Welfare's report on Auto- complex society, the need to apply technology to man's mated Personal Data Systems, a report which I per- needs, and, fear not, we are only using it for socially sonally believe (and obviously I am biased because of desirable purposes. having served on the committee) is probably one of Because of the emotional tone of that debate, more the most advanced and most sensitive statements of the heat was generated than light. I feel perfecdy comfort- problem and of possible solutions. Sincethe publication HEW able in saying that because during that period I was of the report, we have had a flurry of legislative one of the heat generators. Fortunately, in the six years activity. There have been legislative proposals, such as we have learned a great deal about the issue, the stakes those we will hear more about this morning by Con- that are involved, the need of the technical community gressman Koch and Congressman Goldwater, present- to be in touch with the legal, civil liberties, and con- ing to the Congress two basic models for regulating suming communities, to develop a better feel for the technologyto achieve the much needed balance between legitimate and the illegitimate applications of tech- technology and privacy. We have, as Dr. Ancker- 2a Johnson just indicated, the President giving personal so ago decided Roe versus Wade which some of you attention to the privacy issue. He has done this through will recognize as the abortion decision. Most people a very clear statement in the 1976 State of the Union think it is simply an abortion case. If you read it Message and in last Saturday's statement on privacy carefully, it also is a privacy case. For the first time and the appointment of a committee on privacy at the in American legal history we have a clear and un- cabinet level with a mandate to report in four months. equivocal statement by the Supreme Court that there This short-term mandate seems to me to reflect the fact is a constitutional right of privacy in this country that that the time for rock throwing is over, the time for cannot be undermined by the State. In the Roe case, study is over (we have more studies than we probably the intrusion took the form of an attempt by a State need), and the time for action is at hand. to outlaw abortion. It is perfectly clear, of course, that At the State level, we not only have legislation conservative readers of the case will say that to the activity, we have legislative fruition. In the field of extent it recognizes a constitutional right of privacy, arrest records, Alaska, Iowa and Massachusetts have Roe can be limited to a right of privacy relating to the enacted comprehensive data protection statutes dealing human body. Even that is not an unqualified right with criminal justice information. Comparable legis- because no one would say we have a constitution right lation is now pending in upwards of fifteen other to commit suicide, which arguably involved privacy States. In the general field of data protection, we have of the body. A liberal reading of the opinion, however, legislative activity comparable to the efforts of Con- would be that although this case happened to involve gressmen Koch and Goldwater in Michigan, California, an abortion or physical or body privacy that does not Ohio, Massachusetts, Minnesota, and probably five or mean that the Roe case cannot be applied beyond that ten other States that have not come to my attention context and extended to spatial privacy, or associa- with a good prospect of legislative action in some of tional privacy, which in effect already has been recog- these States this year. nized in earlier cases and, most important of all from The courts have seen an increased number of actions our perspective, information privacy. We are just going brought by public interest organizations, social activ- to have to wait and see how subsequent cases interpret ists, the ACLU, concerned citizens, and consumer and apply Roe. groups, trying to challenge and rectify some of the Thus, it is quite appropriate that we are conducting imbalances in our traditional legal approach to matters this panel this morning on legislative proposals in an of privacy. The issue even has achieved international attempt to explore some of the details and the direction dimensions. Sweden has enacted a comprehensive data these legislative and administrative proposals are tak- base protection act. The Federal Republic of Germany ing. They are numerous but they follow relatively well may legislate on the subject this year. The Japanese, defined formats and hopefully during the next three the English, the Danish, the French, and the Italians hours the members of the panel will be able to transmit all are contemplating legislative proposals. OECD, some sense of what is going on in the Congress, the through its Computer Utilization Group and its Data State legislatures and the regulatory bodies. The ex- Bank panel is now engaged in extensive study and the pectation, of course, is that somehow through this dis- formulation of recommendations with regard to the cussion of these activities you will come away with a multinational use of personal information. sense of where the law is moving with regard to the Finally, the United States Supreme Court a year or computer security and computer privacy issue. CURRENT LEGISLATIVE PROPOSALS IN CONGRESS Congressman Edward Koch I. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. 20515 I was delighted at the invitation to participate in Since this is not a lay audience that has to be con- this Conference and am especially pleased to have the verted, I will merely highlight the keypoints of the bill opportunity today to discuss my privacy legislation tod—ay. You're as familiar with the background as I with you. I've been involved with the privacy issue am indeed, more so, because of the technical aspects since coming to Congress in January of 1969; and —as which you handle everyday. My bill contains the fol- Dr. Miller points out, we have come a long way lowing provisions: It would open the files. It would very long way. I introduced the first privacy bill in permit every individual to see his or her own file, the Congress on February 19, 1969, and to indicate subject to some very reasonable safeguards. It would how quickly Congress moves on this, it was not until permit you to correct the files. It would permit you to exactly five years later on February 19, 1974, that add supplementary information which would explain hearings were held on the bill. This was an important material contained in the file that may be correct but breakthrough, however, because it showed, as Dr. which requires an explanation. It would limit what Miller pointed out, the change in the climate. could be collected. Now, you would think that would 3be something that the Administration could support. in view of the prior correspondence. Won't you look The witness who appea —red before the Committee from again?" He writes back, "How many times do I the Justice Department a very sympathetic, very good have to tell you, we don't have a file on you. We do witness said, "Well, really, the Administration is not have your name in a cross index to find your volumi- desirous of supporting this approach which attacks all nous correspondence. If you think we should not, feel of the agencies in this way. We want an agency-by- free to introduce legislation." I write back, "Terrific agency bill." That will take, not five years, that will letter, great sense of humor, let's have lunch." take fifty years. And I think it is a delaying tactic. I called him and although we couldn't have lunch, In my judgement, H.R. 12206 and H.R. 12207, both he came to my office with his assistant. First thing I of which I authored, are more effective proposals. In said was, "Mr. Director, you said you don't have a deference to the Committee, I removed the Federal file on me and I accept that. But you do have files on Privacy Board, which I think is important, from my other members of Congress." His assistant says, "Just original legislation and H.R. 12206 permits each a minute, Congressman. We want to make something agency to provide its regulation separately. Each very clear. The Director said we don't have a file on agency would publish its regulations, thereby permit- you. We do have some memoranda, so that when we ting the flexibility that the Administration desires. I come over we'll have an opportunity to discuss with made this revision because there's a split on the Gov- you matters which may be of interest to you and have ernment Op —erations Committee with respect to any some information about your interests." So, he said, new boards many members are opposed to establish- "For example, we know you graduated from Fordham ing new boards. I happen to believe the Federal Priv- University." I said, "I didn't go to Fordham Univer- acy Board is very important, but in order to get the sity. I went to CCNY." legislation through, I am willing to support the bill Shortly after that meeting, I sued the FBI to get my without the Federal Privacy Board and permit each file. Finally, as a result of the change of the Attorney agency to promulgate its own regulations. As people General, the agency agreed to furnish me with the begin to gain access to their files, it is my hope that material required under the Freedom of Information ultimately a board or some intergovernmental agency Act. And so the FBI sent over my alleged file. Now, would assume those functions, however, in a compar- what did it include? Well, it included my newspaper able manner to the Freedom of Information Act. That's clippings. It included a flyer listing me in opposition bill number one. to the A.B.M. It included my testimony before the Bill number two is the more comprehensive bill, Senate Committee on opposition to the confirmation H.R. 9786, which is before the Judiciary Committee, of Acting Director Gray, and it also had a face sheet and which would regulate all data banks whether gov- which I assume exists in every file. I'm going to read ernment operated or privately operated. As you know, the face sheet—to you. H.R. 12206 covers government data banks; H.R. 9786 It's official "November 7, 1968, U.S. Government covers all data banks but contains basically the same Memorandum. On November 5, 1968, Democrat Ed- provisions as H.R. 12206 plus the Federal Privacy win I. Koch of New York City was elected to the 17th Board. Congressional District held by retiring Representative Let me share with you a couple of experiences indi- Ted Kupferman. —Koch was born in 24 in New York cating why it's necessary that we do something here. City." It goes on he's a former councilman, he's been As a result of a press release issued by Acting FBI a Democratic leader since 1968. Then it says "infor- Director L. Patrick Gray, I learned in October 1972 mation in Bu files." I assume that means Bureau files. that the FBI was discontinuing the practice of collect- "A check of Bureau indices reflects no reference iden- ing dossiers on members of Congress. So I wrote him tifiable with Koch." My reaction was that maybe if a letter. I said, "Terrific, please send over my dos- they had looked under my real name, not Edwin Koch, sier." He wrote back, saying, "No, (I had misunder- but Edward Koch, they would have come up with my stood) that the FBI was not collecting dossiers. It file. was simply collecting newspaper clippings and bio- Now, I mention this to you to indicate the need for graphical material." So I said, "Send over my clip- legislation in this area. Now, the errors, if you will, pings and my biographical material." He responded the irrelevancies relating to me and to my files, are to the effect that, "We only do that on a need-to-know- not of any great moment; but if we make those errors, basis and you don't need to know." As you know, he how many other errors are there that will never be was not confirmed and his successor was William found and that will remain in the files of individuals, Ruckelshaus. I sent the same correspondence, got the constantly affecting their progression either in govern- same response, and he was not confirmed. The third ment or outside of government. So, if there is any and current Director is Clarence Kelly. When he was legislation that I believe requires the support of every- confirmed, I sent him a note: "Dear Director, I hope one, conservatives and liberals alike, it's legislation to there's a change. I'd like my file." He responds, "We ensure the right of privacy. Thank you very much. don't have a file on you." I write back, "That's strange 4CURRENT LEGISLATIVE PROPOSALS IN CONGRESS Congressman Barry M. Goldwater, Jr. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. 20515 Distinguished former colleague of mine, Congress- disclosing the number to organizations that lack such man Jackson Belts, who was one of the pathfinders in authority. promoting legislation to protect privacy, once said: This legislation is designed to prevent the Social "Privacy is not simply an absence of information Security Number from becoming a "Standard Univer- about us in the minds of others; rather, it is the con- sal Identifier" that can be used by computers to track trol we have over information about ourselves." all the errors, omissions, and/or sins of an individual I am pleased to be a Congressional participant in from cradle to grave. the Conference sponsored by the Institute for Com- Other actions included the introduction of legislation puter Sciences and Technology, here today. to require consumer reporting agencies to allow a con- Since coming to Congress almost five years ago, I sumer to inspect credit records, legislation to protect have become increasingly concerned about the grow- individuals from statistical reporting systems, and a ing menace privacy invasion poses to the American Bill to establish a select committee on Privacy in the citizen. House of Representatives. Recent events indicate that Early last year, I decided to initiate certain pro- more and more people are becoming concerned about posals to assure the American citizen that he would privacy invasion. This is a good sign, because I have indeed have control, as mentioned by Congressman always maintained —that the worst enemy of privacy is Betts, over information compiled and retained about not the computer its worst enemy is apathy and him. ignorance. An initial report was to work very closely with the I am pleased that the President addressed himself Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare prior and to privacy in his recent State of the Union Address. HEW after the release of the very extensive study en- Just a few days ago, he announced the formation of a titled "Records, Computers, and the Rights of Citi- commission on the issue of Privacy and Data Banks zens." This report was released last July. in our country. I was most impressed with this study, and in order Suffice—to say, it does us little good to attack the to carry out its specific recommendations, I introduced computer it is only an instrument of ma —n. \^Tiat must two bills. be attacked is the computer mentality the kind of One, "The Freedom of Information Act," H.R. faceless bureaucracy in and out of Governxnent that 11275, is basically aimed at accomplishing the follow- seeks to make the computer a supreme being. ing three objectives: The potential of privacy invasion is always present (1) To guarantee individuals the right to find out in a sophisticated computer operation. Remarkably, what information is being maintained about the misuse of information held about individuals in them in computerized systems and be able to computer systems has been held to a minimum. But obtain a copy ofit upon demand. the potential for misuse is still there, and certainly (2) To allow a person to contest the accuracy, data surveillance has grown to very menacing propor- pertinence, and timeliness of any information tions due to the technological advances which alter such in a computer-accessible record about him. information Given multiple use and consolidation (3) To require record-keeping organizations to in- through automated systems. form individuals on request of all uses made of Substantial increases in demand for personal reports information being kept about them in compu- by Government Agencies, Private Systems, and Social terized files. Science Researchers have intensified the severity of the Shortly after introducing this bill, I joined with Massa- problem. chusetts Governor Frances Sargent, Senator Edward As you know, it is not enough for us to discuss the Brooke, and Congressman Michael Harrington, in an technology of the computer and speak of privacy in administrative petition with the Justice Department, an abstract fashion. We must resolve, at this Confer- which asked former Attorney General Elliot Richard- ence, and in every other private and public forum to son to terminate operation of the F.B.I. Administered do what is necessary to protect our constitutional Offender Files, which are a part of the National Crime right to privacy. Information Center, until he had issued formal regu- Let us make no mistake about it. the computer al- lations to safeguard the rights of individual citizens. ready knows more about most of us than we know Additionally, I introduced a bill to amend the Social about ourselves. The amount of data held in com- Security Act, that would give each individual in this puter systems is enormous. Think about it for a mo- country the right to refuse to disclose his or her Social ment. The list includes tax returns, census responses, Security Number. Then too, organizations with the social security data, military records, security files, authority to use the number would be prohibited from finger prints, FHA and VA mortgage guarantees, 5— credit records, health data, and social research involv- or information, whether computer-stored or not, can ing individuals. Such examples are barely the tip of lead to bizarre occurrences that constiute a blatant in- the iceberg. vasion of privacy. I say tip of the iceberg because everytime Congress Two years ago 15 men wearing beards and dirty passes legislation giving the Federal Government added clothes took a battering ram and knocked down the responsibilities and power, more paperwork is created door of a suspected violator of a Federal Gun Law. and consequently more information is known about the Did this happen in Soviet Russia? No, it happened individual citizen. near Washington, D.C. The suspect was a law-abiding Of course, this is a sobering thought, but what can citizen, who only collected h —armless antique weapons. we do about it? He is now totally paralyzed his life is in shambles. Initially, we must understand our right to privacy The ruffians who perpetrated this crime? They were and how important it is to protect this right. Secondly, officials of the U.S. Treasury Department, and they we must rely on wise laws that protect our privacy broke into the victim's home on faulty information rights. that he was in violation of the 1968 Gun Control Act. We must remember that our citizens give the Gov- This is not a remote example. Earlier this year, the ernment personal information on what should be on same thing happened to a family in Winthrop, Massa- a confidential basis and for a specific purpose. Ameri- chusetts. A couple and their daughter, who was ill, cans deserve the assurance that this information will were awakened in the middle of the night when State not be used for any other purpose in the future. But, and Federal Lawmen broke down two doors to their do we have this assurance? Not necessarily, I fear. home on a narcotics raid. The policemen had entered Several years ago a House Congressional Committee the wronghome. discovered that the confidentiality of Government files Of course these are clear-cut examples of privacy is a myth. Such files sometimes float from agency to invasion. There should be no question that they also agency. Federal investigators in some instances are violated the Fourth Amendment to the Constituion. given access to information far removed from the sub- But, there are other examples almost as sinister in ject of their inquiry. Folders sit open for inspection nature. I have received numerous letters from Ameri- on desks and in the "in" and "out" baskets of many can citizens describing examples of Data Bank and Government offices. Outright "leaks" of information Social Security number abuse. Each letter seems to occasionally come to light. detail a new horror story worse than the one before. Of course this is interesting, you say. But, then you Some of the letters have actually come from computer add that the Government has never misused the in- systems analysts in the field of data processing. formation about you, so why worry? But, I submit The protection of personal files in all data systems that this may not be the case in the future unless we deserves immediate attention on the part of both the begin to embark on a course to make certain that it Government and the private sector. I would like to will not be misused. challenge this Conference to not only exchange ideas It is always possible for unscrupulous men in high and make recommendations to assure the privacy of places to apply unethical standards to the use of con- individual data subjects in computer operations, but fidential information. One of History's leading exam- I would like to see a definitive statement emanate ples is the detailed European census that was in effect from this Conference calling for a restoration of free- long before the advent of Hitler. Tragically, this cen- dom of privacy. sus provided a convenient and efficient tool for Nazi It is not difficult to determine the adverse potential use in many European nations. In some countries like of today's technology on our right to privacy. What Czechoslovakia, statistical data already available facili- is difficult is making certain our traditional liberties tated the Nazi takeover. and beliefs can be secure against growing technologi- Impossible here? Not necessarily. Erroneous data cal onslaughts against privacy. A CITIZEN'S VIEW OF THE PRIVACY ISSUE Jane L. Hardaway State of Tennessee Department of Personnel, Nashville, Tennessee 37219 I am most appreciative of the opportunity to be with The topic today vitally concerns our individual you today to discuss the very important subject of the liberties. More than that, it concerns this Nation's role of Government and the individual's right of ability to preserve such rights and still maintain the Privacy. I find it altogether fitting and appropriate fabric of Government as it was intended by all of those that this topic should be discussed by us in this place who have, over the years, so hotly debated the subjects Washington, the Nation's Capitol, for it is here that ofliberty in this very city. each citizen must still look to find not only properly Constitutionally protected privacy of individual citi- exercised governmental authority but also legislative zens in their persons, houses, papers and effects is not protection from improperly exercised authority. a new concept. It is as old as the Constitution itself. 6In recent times, however, it has grown to hold more not the past. Let me briefly discuss with you one area and more importance and be more constantly in the with much potential for danger for us all. Fact gather- public eye. No one can long dispute the fact that our ing, as I have stated earlier, in many ways can threaten Government can and must exercise sufficient power the rights of citizens. I hope you will be able to see, over individuals both in and out of the country to as I have, that governmental action in derogation of protect itself from invasion or revolution. If this were our rights can be a monster of two heads and perhaps not so, we should have long ago ceased to operate more. One head surely is illegal and unwarranted under our Constitution. When, however, does the exer- surveillance of citizens, the other is indiscriminant and cise of such power cease to be proper and begin to abusive personal data collection and dissemination. encroach upon the rights of citizens? Record keeping has gone on since the Stone Age During the decade of the sixties and early seventies, but record keeping techniques have grown and be- there was much unrest and violent dissent across the sophisticated ways of data gathering. There are, of nation. I, like the vast majority of our citizens, was course, many good reasons for collecting statistical and shocked and eventually enraged by the actions taken research data. These systems, however, also must be by those individuals and organizations whose primary carefully safeguarded in order to protect the data purpose was the disruption and eventual overthrow subject from injury. In 1972, the then Secretary of of our governmental system. It was clear to me that in Health, Education and Welfare, Elliott Richardson, the name of a "better way," they felt that their ends created a citizen's Advisory Committee on automated justified any violent means, a philosophy too horrible personal data systems and I was appointed a member for me to contemplate. of that committee. The committeeencompassed a broad In my mind, the conviction held that it is not the range of expertise and experience and equally diverse Government's right but its duty to protect us and range of viewpoints. itself from such factions. Excesses resulting in such Given this diversity, it should be no surprise that violence cannot be tolerated. at our first meeting, in the spring of 1972, the views The Government did take action, indeed we have of individual members on the significance of applying now learned that a great deal of activity has been computer technology to personal data record keeping, taking place in the use of secret surveillance and per- sometimes differed sharply. Many, indeed probably sonal data collections. In viewing what we now know most, did not initially feel a sense of urgency about the to be the Government's actions in this regard, some- potential ill effects of current practices. Some agreed thing has occurred to me. The Government, too, has that computer based record keeping posed a latent been more than capable of excesses of power in the danger to individual citizens, but looked optimistically promotion of its interests. A Government of such to technical innovations, particularly access control power and size that it is considered the strongest on devices. Others painted dramatic portraits of the po- earth; a Government with such technical expertise at tential benefits of large scale data networks to citizens its disposal as to be almost science fictional in nature. in a densely populated, highly mobile society. This Government, with all of its power, expertise and Slowly, however the attitudes of the members knowhow, has been absolutely capable of overstepping changed. Shared concerns took root as we heard testi- constitutional powers and this, not against foreign ele- mony from over 100 witnesses representing more than ments threatening invasion, but against a small group 50 different organizations. The danger that individuals of "so-called" citizens intent on the overthrow of our without knowledge or warning could be harmed and national framework but against us all. For in the final harrassed by an unthinking machine came out in the analysis, each of us, no matter how law-abiding, is light of day for all of us to see. We were not the threatened when Government violates its own legal only ones concerned with this topic. precepts, no matter what theory is used to justify such In an article published in the February Issue of acts. And it is my belief that such acts of power once "Barrister Magazine," Senator Sam J. Ervin, Jr. dis- abused will grow in abuse as the power grows to be cussed his investigation into the computerized collec- utilized for it, unless there is restraint by law. tion of personal data by the Federal Government. He The questions then are posed anew: what power indicated that, at the present time, there are at least should the Government have in fact gathering and 750 separate data banks with varying contents and what power should the Government have to protect its operational guidelines within the Federal Agencies. citizens from other potential threats to personal priv- 750 separate places where a citizen's name, address, acy? What rights do the citizens have for protection occupation, family history or countless other bits and against governmental abuses, and finally, what re- pieces of information about his life may be stored, and straints of law should be applicable to all levels of more im.portantly, 750 different opportunities for such Government for the protection of those rights? For information to be used in ways completely unknown these answers, we cannot look exclusively to history. and objectionable to the subject or to be disseminated We cannot look to actions taken by prior presidents, without the subject's knowledge or concent. prior attorneys general or the prior actions of govern- Further, the information may not even be correct. mental agencies, for we now know that many times Senator Ersin reports that in one system, there was a such actions were exercises of abuse. It is a new day numbered coding system to indicate whether an indi- and the answers to the new day's problems most cer- vidual was or was not a Communist and that the num- tainly will be answered in the context of the future. ber code indicating an individual was a Communist 7was only one number different from that indicating ator Aronoff and I served, made several specific rec- non-Communist. Were any of those codes incorrect? ommendations. Senator Ervin's subcommittee on con- The Senator wonders and so do I. For the consequences stitutional rights has made others. I would not attempt of disseminating such erroneous information would be to list the various proposals suggested nor to read the horrendous on an individual's career and life. list of legislative measures which have been proposed, It concerns me, as a mother of a daughter who has for my purpose here today has been to discuss the attended college during recent times. Is it possible that problem from the point of view of the individual citi- she might have been seen standing innocently near a zen. All of the proposals require our careful consider- gathering which turned violent and someone noted in a ation, however, and more importantly, the careful file somewhere that she was an active participant? An consideration of the Congress. error could have been made and somewhere a com- Mr. Justice Brandeis spoke of the problem in the puter could contain such erroneous information which 1928 case of Olmstead versus the United States when will prevent her from being employed or obtaining he said: credit. She has no way of knowing, nor do I. An error of observation or a mistake in coding could, through improper dissemination, destroy her life " pE rox tp ee cr tie ln ic be erts yho wu hld ente tac hl ei Gu os vet ro nmb ee ntm 'o sst puo rn poso eu sr ag ru ear bd enet -o without any sort of attendant guilt or her part. Do any ficent. Men born to freedom are naturally alert to repel in- of us know in which data banks our names might vasion of their liberty by evil-minded rulers. The greatest appear or what information about us is stored away by dangers to liberty lurk in insidious encroachment by men such machines or, finally, what uses are made of the of zeal, well-meaning, but without understanding." information? Clearly, the dangers indicated require that action I am hopeful that now, 46 years later, positive action be taken for our protection. The final question then will be taken for protection of rights so long and becomes: What action? The committee on which Sen- flagrantly abused by those who govern us. THE ISSUES OF PRIVACY AND COMPUTER SECURITY WITHIN THE STATE OF OHIO Stanley Aronoff J. Ohio State Senator, State House, Columbus, Ohio 45215 Thank you very much, Arthur. You ought to know that promote such a code. Do they justify the kind of from the Harvard faculty that there's nothing more strict legislation that I hope you will be an advocate. virtuous than a convert and I freely confess to being Number One: The unfair information practice of just that. That was my function, at least for 14 of getting loo much information. Here are some of the HEW the 23 meetings of the Committee. For some examples that we get out of the Committee after hun- period of time, after each witness that came forward, dreds of hours and mounds of testimony. Take the 1 generally asked the question. "What's all the fuss Credit Bureau as an example. We all know the neces- about?" "What are we trying to hide?" Or, "you sity for credit; we all know that there are computer haven't scared me yet." banks storing credit information, the largest one being Some place around the 14th meeting, I noticed a big in Atlanta. But, aside from the earning capacity, is it change in my own questioning technique and by the necessary for the neighbors to be asked whether an end 1 was raving for action and demanding that there individual entertains at late parties, drinks, takes bea shield of privacy that each of us may use and have drugs, and all kinds of information such as that, sub- if we get stored in the bowels of the computer. jective information, which then gets stored into the I might say in starting out that I am anti-technol- computer even though it's hearsay? We had an exam- ogy or anti-computer. Frankly, 1 can't envision any ple of a man in New York who had his insurance modern life without the sophisticated use of com- cancelled because his son had long hair. Because the puters. So, it's merely a balancing act that I'm inter- son had long hair that meant to the neighbor that ested in. An act that protects an individual's rights on everybody was on drugs in that family, they were "bad the one hand and does not inhibit the justifiable use risks"! Therefore, the insurance company cancelled of computer technology. I realize I have a very learned and it took a period of time for the man to get his audience and I hope you won't consider me totally insurance back. Annoying, but something we should boring if I identify for you in very short form what all consider after we look at our children, or look at HEW is listed in the Report. If you're going to have ourselves. a Code of Fair Information Practice, then you have Or examine the guaranteed student loan program. to start at the beginning and identify what are the The purpose of that program is to give money to unfair information practices that are going on now needy children in order for them to get an education. 8— But in one state which testified before the Committee, it to court. The question is do wewant correct records! other questions were asked, such as, "project your 1 think what's going on in Washington gets at that grades," or "project the kind of sex activity that you'll point. be getting into at the University." Well, what does But I think another more tragic type of example is that have to do with a guaranteed student loan pro- one where a young person had just recently gotten gram; and when we asked the interviewer why the out of the war. He and his wife, after a long conver- question was asked, she just said, "I thought I'd like sation, had decided to adopt a young child from a to know about that." There's no way of stopping that foreign country, until the report came back that this kind of "I'd like to know about" on questionnaires fellow was "morally unfit." Why was he morally unfit? that are prepared countless times in all kinds of pro- He had been labeled a "heroin addict" on his way out fessions and Government. of the military service. Now I don't know if you all Unfair information practice Number Two: Using remember when you were discharged from the Army, information for purposes other than those for which it but I remember the mustering out process and some was originally gathered. There was an example that of the guys that were doing it, and I ask you whether came before the Committee of a man that walked into it's possible that somebody in that line might make an the home of a young GI just after he had gotten out error and label someone a heroin addict when the of the Vietnamese war, reached into his pocket and person was not. It obviously is possible and in this flicked out an envelope. When the young GI picked it case it happened and it took the Red Cross a year to up and opened it, there was $10,000. Well, $10,000 solve the problem and there were still problems in a for what? This man was being contacted and given Domestic Court thereafter. $10,000 in order to kill an underworld figure. He was A fourth unfair information practice is: being being contacted by organized crime in order to become haunted by paper ghosts of the past. In 1974, the idea a contract killer. Why? Because somehow they had of "Go West, young man and start a new life" is ridicu- gotten hold of his army record and found that this lous. Your records get there long before you do. We guy had been involved in a number of "kills" in the can't escape to your State anymore, Mr. Cullen. If we Vietnamese War. try to leave Ohio, or Massachusetts, you'll catch us out What about the simplest example that happens to us there or the record will. — all junk mail. I am a politician in the State of Ohio. And we had an example before the Committee of a I received this in the mail last week (showing exhibit). person who did not accept promotion in a rather large "Senior Citizen. Computerized mailing list of over 7 retail chain. This man was black, and it would have million over-65 adults." It was compiled from all kinds been a good promotion. But it would have meant re- of things: medicare policies, adult retirement, and it vealing a minor misdemeanor on the east coast some goes on for a few other things; then it says, "marital 25 years before. The problem that he had was that it status: couples only, widows, etc.; home ownership, might have cast some disparagement on his race when retirement income level; age and date of birth in he was reaching a high level. The question has to come selected States"; and finally, "five digit zip codes on up whether there should be some statute of limitations test orders under 10,000 names"; then in yellow under- on stale information. lined and I did not do this: "political campaigns for And finally, I suppose the most important of the use of senior citizen voters." (Arthur, you might want unfair information practices, the denyingof an individ- to use this in the next compilation that you have.) ual, the denying of you and me of the effective control Again, we all are victims of junk mail. Some of it we of our record. I guess the simplest example that we like and some of it we don't. In the State of Ohio, all have is when we take an insurance examination. I raised holy hell because the State was proudly saying We get an examination from an insurance doctor. Be- that when you go to buy an automobile license each fore going to the Committee, I was naive and thought year we take your name and we sell it. Well, terriffic! that that was an examination just for that insurance The State of Ohio made $65,000 that way and then company; I didn't realize that it was stored in a master from that point on, somebody else owns your name bank. Although the insurance industry has told me and you get advertisements for this kind of thing for countless times since then that one company or another your new car and that kind of thing for your new company never has an opportunity to look into that car; and they, in turn, sell the list to somebody else bank. If a person has been denied coverage by one and ultimately you have the progression here. The company and the other company knows it, I ask you State of Ohio no longer doesthat. whether or not that has some bearing. But more im- Unfair information practice number three.: Using portantly, you don't have an opportunity to look at incorrect or incomplete information. Here I think we your medical record if you are stored there. (Note, have the example of the arrest record which has been this has now been changed.) And I think that's the talked about over and over and over again, and I key. If there's nothing to beafraid, when why shouldn't merely would say that the statistics that came before you have a chance to look at your record and see if the Committee indicate that a substantial percentage there are some corrections that should be made. and I fo—rget the exact percentage but I know it was The 55 mile speed limit will catch us all from time shocking all youth under the age of 25 will have to time. It used to be that when you were stopped for been arrested and charged with a crime. Yet a great speeding, your friendly police officer came up to you majority, a preponderant majority, will not even make and said, "Now, Stan, you're going a little fast" and 9you have a conversation back and forth and you And finally, although I do not know whether this usually got the ticket anyway after you tried to talk will remain in the bill, it prohibits the use of the social him out of it. That's not the case now. Now you're security number unless specifically authorized by Fed- stopped. You giveyour driver's license with your social eral law. security number. The police officer goes into his car On the other hand, th—ere's a set of do's and don't's and he dials the regional computer center of a certain for computer managers a kind of "code of ethics." area which in turn plugs into Washington and then First of all, every person or firm operating an auto- back it comes with your record. Not only your auto- mated, personal data system must file with our State mobile record, but your whole criminal record. And of Ohio in a designated agency a statement of purposes i tn hs ete Ra id ppo ef r.c "atc Ah ni dng lA ar wth eu nr foM ril cl ee mr e, ntyou offm ica ey rs g ae rt e"J va ec ryk ia nn fd oru ms ee ds co of nst eh ne td oa fta ansy is nt de im vi; dum au ls —t yoob ut—ai bn eft oh re e p mr ai ko -r proud if they catch somebody by doing that. But what ing use of data, must appoint one person responsible about the incorrect record and the pro —blem that these for the security in information in the system and in- are collected from local governments the theory of form all employees using the system of safeguards "garbage in, garbage out." established pursuant to the act; specify disciplinary Well, I think I've talked enough so that I at least measures to be applied against anyone who is dis- ought to get to the bill. And the bill I've introduced couraged from reporting if something is wrong; take into Ohio is very similar to the Congressional bills precautions to protect the data from unauthorized use; that you heard. It is similar in other respects to the make no transfer of individually identifiable data to California bill, but I hope it has some individuality of another system without the prior consent of the in- its own. I hope we'll have a chance of its passage. dividual concerned; maintain a complete, accurate On the one hand, it describes individual rights. What record of every access and use made of data in the rights do you have if you get into a computer? And system ; and maintain the data in the system with such i describes them. You have to be informed in writing accuracy as to fairly reflect the individual's current if you're legally required to give the data. You have qualifications and characteristics. Finally, eliminate to be informed in writing whether you're the subject the stale data. of the data in a system and, upon request, that data The act gives civil and criminal penalties, injunctive must be made available to you. You have to be assured relief, and a variety of court actions that say, in effect, in writing that no use of the data will be made beyond that these are not just words written by the Ohio the stated purposes of the system as reasonably under- legislature; but if a person has been aggrieved, then stood by you. You have to be informed upon request thatperson has a method for redress. of the uses made of the data concerning you. Proce- It's tough stuff and hearings start next Tuesday. dures to allow you to contest the accuracy, the com- Some of the people here are going to be witnesses I pleteness, the pertinence and the timeliness of the data believe and I hope to be able to come back to you and must be made and the bill outline a procedure to make give you a progress report. corrections. Thank you. THE ISSUES OF PRIVACY AND COMPUTER SECURITY WITHIN THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA Assemblyman Mike Cullen California Assembly, Sacramento, California 95814 In November of 1972 California voters responded And just as the eagle and the falcon are integral parts to the question of protection of individual privacy by of our natural ecology, so is privacy an integral part amending the California Constitution to include priv- of our social ecology, and the people of California acy as an inalienable right of all people.^ By that action are asking that the assault on it be halted. the people of California were providing their legisla- We in the California Legislature have responded to lature with a very clear message which reflected a that mandate and have taken, and are in the process general dissatisfaction with the erosion of the personal of taking, a number of steps which will assure that the privacy. privacy of Californians does not become a myth. They had come to the sudden realization that, like One of the more pervasive elements in the assault on the bald eagle and the peregrine falcon, privacy was privacy has been the increasing employment by gov- itself an endangered species too easily taken for ernment and the business sector of electronic data granted. It had been allowed to dwindle to the degree processing (EDP) technology. Tlie California Legisla- that it had become more of a concept than a reality. ture has focused on the uses (and abuses) of this tech- nology in its attempts to come to terms with the issue 'California Constitution, Article 1, Section 1. of privacy. It is apparent that the right of an individ- 10ual to privacy is contingent on a modern day factor, the State must agree in appropriate contractual lan- that is, computer-related security. Neither constitu- guage to hold confidential the details of the work tional assertion of privacy as a right nor statutory performed. We stipulated also that any EDP-related reaffirmation of this right will enhance its chances for contract entered into by any State entity provide for survival unless provisions are made for security of the contracting staff to be physically on the premises data which is contained in automated systems. of the data center or State entity concerning systems California's long time pioneership in governmental design, programming, documentation, conversion, application of EDP technology has provided our legis- training and all other aspects for which the contractor lature with the background to cope with EDP. The is hired. Further, because California is moving in the State's commitment in this area is evidenced by an direction of consolidating our EDP resources into five annual expenditure of $135 million attributed to com- large-scale consolidated data centers, we required that puter-related costs (and these costs keep rising). This each consolidated data center also designate an infor- figure excludes the millions of Federal dollars spent mation security officer; that the RFP for each center on computer services in health, welfare, criminal jus- contain mandatory objectives to be placed on the tice and the California University Systems. vendor in the areas of confidentiality and privacy. In retrospect, the California Legislature's long stand- Legislative review of the RFP was a requirement prior ing and active interest in the development of EDP to issue. systems in State Government has served to equip it with As a direct result of legislative concern over the sufficient understanding to enable the legislature to enhancement of the assault on privacy made possible respond quickly and realistically to the issue of privacy through electronic means, the 1972 Legislature also in EDP applications. added supplemental budget act language which pro- For some years, the budget enacted each year by hibited the transmission of data from one data center the legislature has contained in supplemental language to another by any wire, line or other communications the requirement that the pursuit of maximum EDP device. The one exception allowed has been the transfer . effectiveness in State Government" . . . not jeopardize between two data centers of stolen vehicle information or compromise the confidentiality of information as for law enforcement purposes. provided by statute or the protection of the right of The Legislature's 1972 decision to consolidate the individual privacy as established by law."^ The key State's computers into 5 Data Centers has caused con- is, of course, the dependence on established law. cern. However, it is the consensus that, through data As California's EDP representative to the National consolidation, protection of privacy will be improved Conference of Legislative Leaders, I have shared my through systematic control over all phases of security experiences of 1971—72 where I was the Assembly for each center. In one of the State's consolidated data representative on a joint California Legislative Com- centers, it is expected that more than one billion in- mittee that developed and painstakenly nurtured put/output calls will be made each year. Much of the through both houses urgency legislation,^ passed in information will concern personal data associated with 1972, providing for State Information Security Offi- organizations such as the State Personnel Board and cers. The legislation also served as a basis for require- the Employees Retirement System. The biggest prob- ments added by the legislature in supplemental lan- lem is to equate privacy protection costs to realistic guage to the Budget ACT of 1972. This language re- operational costs. Regardless of the ultimate protection quired that (1) designers of information systems in- afforded in each of the Consolidated Centers, the con- clude in their analyses the recognition of the use of stant recognition of the protection of personal privacy confidential information; (2) strict controls be de- should keep the personnel involved with systems opera- veloped to prevent unauthorized access to data main- tions alert. tained in computer files, including the physical secu- These actions taken by the legislature have in turn rity of program documentation, data files and data caused the Executive Branch of California State Gov- processing facilities as well as electronic controls to ernment to take action to implement the legislative prevent accidental or intentional unauthorized access mandate. For example, we now have information secu- to data, (3) each state department designate an in- rity officers in State departments and in consolidated formation security officer responsible for implementing Data Centers. We now have in the process of develop- state policies and standards regarding the confidenti- ment an EDP facility auditing program of which an ality and security of information for that department, integral part is the auditing of EDP security and con- (4) the Department of Finance (which has statewide fidentiality. We now have continuously updated secu- control of EDP in California State Government) con- rity guidelines and checklist package for use by State tinually review the adequacy of State policies and Agencies in the establishment and maintenance of procedures with regard to confidentiality of data and appropriate safeguards for the physical and confiden- report to the legislature on progress in this area, and tial protection of data. Most importantly, the full at- (5) any contractor engaging in EDP-related work for tention of the legislature has been directed toward this most vital area. This attention must continue because the relative inexpensiveness now associated with the in' g" tS oup tp hl eem Be un dt ga er ty BiR le l"por (t bego if nnt ih ne gC wo im tm hit tt he ee 19o 7n 0-7C 1onf fie sr cae lnc ye earre )l .at- collection, manipulation and dissemination through electronic means of inordinately large amounts of 11» 77S 5B -111 76 80 53 . (Teale 1972), California Government Code Section personal data has effectively removed the economic 11constraints imposed by manual systems which had California because it is not seen as some sort of half- previously precluded most of the "data handling" capa- way measure, but one which will provide an appro- bilities which we now are concerned with. priate level of response to the people's mandate when Our most current effort in the area of privacy, they voted to amend the California Constitution in which, has generated interest nationwide, is reflected 1972 to include the right to privacy as an inalienable in Assembly Bill No. 2656 (AB 2656). This measure right. would enact the California Fair Information Practice Now, to get on with the specific areas provided for Act, the provisions of which parallel closely the recom- in AB 2656, the measure stipulates requirements mendations contained in the widely read report pre- placed on those maintaining an automated personal pared for the U.S. Department of Health, Education data system for the safeguarding of data maintained and Welfare (HEW) entitled "Records Computers and in such systems. These requirements include (1) iden- the Rights of Citizens." tifying one individual immediately responsible for the In fact, AB 2656 recognizes in its provisions the five system, (2) the instruction of appropriate employees HEW basic principles which form the basis for the regarding required safeguards, (3) reasonable physi- report's recommended code of Fair Information Prac- cal, technical and procedural precautions to protect tice. As stated in the Bill, the California Legislature data in the system from any unauthorized release, recognizes these principles to be: transfer, access or use, or any threat or hazard to the 1. There must be no personal data record-keeping security of the system, (4) the establishment of safe- systems whose very existence is secret. guards regarding the transfer between systems of in- 2. There must be a way for an individual to find dividually identifiable personal data before any such out what personal information about him is in a record transfers may take place, and (5) the elimination from and how it is used. a computer-accessible form of obsolete data. 3. There must be a way for an individual to prevent Secondly, the bill requires that those maintaining personal information about him that was obtained for an automated personal data system give annual notice one purpose from being used or made available for of the existence and character of the system. This no- other purposes without his consent. tice must be filed with the California State Department 4. There must be a way for an individual to correct of Consumer Affairs as a permanent public record, or amend a record of identifiable personal information must contain a number of specified informational items about him. including the procedures whereby an individual can 5. An organization creating, maintaining, using, or be informed if he is the subject of data in the system, disseminating records of identifiable personal data and if a subject, how he can gain access to such data must ensure the reliability of the data for their in- and contest its accuracy, completeness, pertinence and tended use and must take precautions to prevent mis- timeliness. use of the data. Thirdly, the measure provides for the rights of in- The measure has already passed its house of origin, dividuals on whom personal data are maintained. the assembly, and is now pending in the senate. Be- These rights include the requirement that an individual cause it is still in the legislative process, it is naturally asked to supply personal data must be informed in subject to further revision. Its introduction has gen- writing whether he is legally required to supply the erated a considerable amount of interest in the Cali- data requested, of any consequence which may arise fornia business community and also in the State and by his permission or refusal to supply such data, and local Government sectors. This interest and concern of the uses to which such data will be put. Further may influence to a degree the final version of the provisions in this area require (1) that an individual measure. In this regard dialogues have been initiated be provided in writing, at his request, information between our legislative staff and various interested which discloses whether he is the subject of data in groups in order to make appropriate clarifications to the system in question, and if so, that such data be the measure. made fully available to the individual in a form com- Because I have brought a sufficient number of copies prehensible to him, (2) that no use of individually of the current version on the bill for distribution, I identifiable personal data is made which is not within will just touch on its highlights in my presentation the stated purposes of the system as reasonably under- to you. To begin with, the provisions enumerated in stood by the individual at the time he was asked to AB 2656 apply to both governmental and nongovern- provide the data. (3) That no data about an individual mental automated systems which contain personal data are made available from the system in response to a s( cw rh ii bc esh ai ns ytde hf ii nn ged aba os ut an. . ina dn iy vii dun af lorm aa nt dio wn hit cha ht cd ae n- pd re om ca esn sd uf no lr esd sat aa rm ea ad se onab by leme ea ffn os rtof hac som bp eu el nso mr ay dl eega tl o be associated with an identifiable individual"). This notify the individual in question, and (4) that proce- is a rather all-encompassing definition and may explain dures are maintained which allow an individual to why the measure has generated such widespread in- contest personal data maintained on him, and, where terest within the State among groups that would be the contest is not resolved favorably, to provide that affected by enactment of its provisions. Simply put, whenever disputed data are disclosed such disclosure AB 2656 will leave no stone unturned in terms of the clearly note this fact and a copy or accurate summary protective umbrella it would provide for our citizens. of the individual's statement in this regard be pro- It would affect a good number of organizations in vided with the data. 12. In the way of "teeth" with which to ensure compli- quired to insure the protection of individual privacy ance with the various provisions of AB 2656, the and the necessary confidentiality of information be- measures contains penaUy provisions which include coming part of an intergovernmental information fines, imprisonment, and punitive damages for specific system." violations. The Board, which receives a nominal amount of In summary, we believe that the Bill will provide a direct State funding, derives much of the productivity meaningful response to the mandate of the people of through volunteer effort contributed by the State and California, that it is comprehensive, and that amend- local Government entities as represented by board ments made to date have not detracted from the meas- members and technical staff. The Board has established ure's original intent, but have in fact made it a pro- a privacy and security committee which, in addition gressively better piece of legislation by providing ap- to working in the area of legislation, has published propriate clarification. just recently a report of the Board entitled "guidelines Another piece of current legislation which has yet establishing requirements for security and confidenti- to be heard before committee has also been introduced ality of information systems." With 58 counties, almost in the California Assembly. This measure, Assembly 400 cities, and 1,124 school districts (not to mention Bill No. 2802, would stipulate some requirements re- 3,000 special districts), the efforts of the Board as garding the use of the Social Security Number. Unlike reflected in the guidelines will be of especial value AB 2656, the provisions of this measure apply to all to the smaller and emerging governmental users of transactions; that is, they are not restricted to the use EDP technology, although it is accurate to state that of the Social Security Number in EDP systems only. there is also considerable room for improvement also In brief, this Bill would require that any person in some of our large EDP facilities. For those inter- who makes necessary the disclosure of an individual's ested, I have sufficient copies of the guidelines table Social Security Number as a part of a commercial or of contents and procedure for ordering the publication. governmental transaction report the fact of such re- With regard to the area of computer security, I quirement to the Department of Consumer Affairs, would like to discuss for a moment a relatively recent which is to maintain a record open for public inspec- occurrence in our State which brought ve —ry much to tion of those persons reporting. home the question of computer security but in a The measure also requires that an individual asked somewhat different light. Incidentally, this occurrence to provide his Social Security Number as part of a demonstrated clearly the willingness of the California commercial or governmental transaction be informed Legislature to meet the security issue head-on and take whether such disclosure is necessary or optional, and appropriate steps to resolve the issue which con- permits an individual to have his Social Security Num- fronted it. ber removed from records where disclosure of the In 1973 California and certain other States received number was not necessary. much national recognition with regard to a particular Further provisions of AB 2802 would make unlaw- incident in the business community. I am referring to ful any requirement of disclosure of an individual's the so-called Equity Funding Scandal as you may re- Social Security Number for personal identification in call. This was a situation where the Equity Funding governmental or commercial transactions unless spe- Corporation of America was found to have perpetrated cifically authorized by Federal or State law. a considerable degree of costly fraud through the use Because AB 2802 has only recently been introduced, of Oc no cm epa tn hy e c no am tp uu rt eer as n. d extent of fraud had become it is difficult to tell at this time whether or not it will evident, our reaction in the California Legislature e tonj do ay teth we its ham Ae Bde 2g 6r 56e .e of success that has been the case w tha es St to ate(a Dm eo pn ag rto mt eh ne tr ot fhi Ing ns s) uraa nu cg eme tn ot prt oh ve idb eud ig tet wito hf Now, looking at the issues of security and privacy sufficient funds to acquire a high-level technical expert from yet another aspect, I would like to discuss some who possessed expertise in the insurance and computer further action that has been taken by our legislature fields in order to develop within the department of in this regard. In California, as in other states, there insurance the ability to audit effectively EDP systems is data exchange and data sharing between the State maintained by insurance companies. and local governmental entities and among local en- Because we have for the most part centralized EDP tities themselves. Recognizing these data transfer "link- training within California State Government, we have ages," the California Legislature has enacted legislation been able to develop with the Department of Insur- creating an Intergovernmental Board on Electronic ance expert a training program which should greatly Data Processing. This Board monitors the development improve the ability of that department to perform of State and local EDP systems which will exchange more effective auditing of systems maintained by in- information, with the objective of assuring that the surance firms. duplication of systems development is avoided, and This is somewhat of a different twist on the com- that appropriate communication takes place among the puter security question. In this case, while we want various governmental jurisdictions participating in the insurance company systems to be secure with regard development of such systems. to the confidentiality of personal data maintained by The Board has also been given specific statutory responsibihty to ". . . recommend any legislation re- *California Government Code, Section 11711, Subsection (t) 13them, we want our department of insurance auditors mittee is actively pursuing its statutory charges of to be capable of determining to the maximum extent (a) reviewing electronic data processing policies; possible when the computer is being used for an (b) developing electronic data processing procedures illegal purpose. to protect privacy and confidentiality of records and In conclusion, I would like to focus on my own rights and privacy of the individual; and (c) report- experience over the past year as well as my thoughts ing recommendations to the Legislature and the Gov- for the future. While chairman of the Assembly effi- ernor. Through the hearing process, the committee is ciency and cost control committee, the committee over generating positive and immediate reactions from the the past three years has heard all electronic data nine campus university and 19 campus university and processing bills including the Fair Information Prac- college systems and the State's vast communication tices Act of 1973 (AB 2656) discussed earlier. Also networking systems in the areas of effective electronic during 1973, the committee conducted four public data processing utilization and protection of informa- hearings concerning computer privacy and security. tion collected and transmitted. In addition, I have been appointed chairman of joint California with nearly 21 million population and legislature subcommittee to develop the plans and goals the business interests associated with this large popu- of legislative electronic data processing. Our report lation has experienced extreme difficulty in encourag- will be promulgated April 15 and will include plans ing the utilization of computers while protecting the for sharing executive files without violating either privacy of individuals and insuring the security of privacy or security. Also, I am participating as chair- data. Through the three committees that I have men- man of a unique high-level executive/legislative statu- tioned, plus the past pressure-filled five years of legis- tory committee^ called the California Information lative maturity in the computer environment, I feel Systems Implementation Committee consisting of the California has established a privacy and security um- directors of finance and general services representing brella which is still a leaky one but at least supported the executive and the chairmen of the Senate and As- by bits and pieces of statutes addressing privacy prob- sembly Finance Committees, the chairman of the joint lems. I am optimistic that by the time the California legislative budget committee and myself as chairman Legislature adjourns on November 30, 1974, the prog- of the efficiency and cost control committee. To insure ress made through legislation and the momentum for nonpartisanship, the Vice Chairman of each Legisla- safeguards established with the private and public tive Committee is also a member at present. The Com- sectors, may well assure the people of California that the word "Privacy" in their Constitution is a mean- ingful one now protected and ready to be defended 11^ 75A 8.B 644 (MacDonald 1973), Government Code Sections 11755- from further unforeseen circumstances. THE ISSUES OF PRIVACY AND COMPUTER SECURITY WITHIN THE STATE OF MASSACHUSETTS Arthur R. Miller Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138 It is very fashionable to think of California as one incidents; and its most recent manifestation was the of the legal pacesetters of the nation. It is true that trial of Dr. Spock and Reverend Coffin. Seriously, how- they did enact a constitutional amendment inserting ever, we do undertake some rather interesting things in privacy into their constitution at their last general Massachusetts. election. Montana has done the same thing. If memory One aspect of Massachusetts law that is interesting serves me right, at the same time that the people of and which I have been asked to speak for a few min- California were voting for privacy, they were also utes on, is that State's recent reaction to problems of voting for the death penalty, against marijuana and privacy. We have a Republican governor. Governor for pornography. This combination suggested an in- Sargent, who takes great pleasure suing a Republican teresting profile of t—he California voter. I, too, come national administration. You heard something about from a unique stale Massachusetts. As I indicated that earlier this morning. It took the form of a petition earlier this morning, I am originally a New Yorker, against the Department of Justice challenging the FBI I have been a Minnesotan; I have been a Michigan- policies with regard to the National Crime Informa- der; and for short periods of time, I have been a tion Center files. Conversely, the Republican adminis- Floridian and a Californian; but I am now from tration in Washington is fond of suing the Common- Massachusetts. Massachusetts has a long, but somewhat wealth of Massachusetts, which they did last year in checkered, legal tradition. It started with the Salem trying to get access to the Massachusetts criminal his- Witch Trials; proceeded through the Sacco Vanzette tory files. 14A great deal is going on in Massachusetts in the appointment by the Governor of a Commission on privacy arena. There are three things worthy of spe- Privacy and Data Protection. In many ways, this Com- HEW cial note. First, Massachusetts was, I think, the first mission is modelled after the Committee. Its State in the Union to legislate with regard to com- charge is about the same and its composition reflects puterized criminal recordkeeping. A statute was passed the same wide angle of experience and expertise that HEW in 1972 that is designed to manage what is called characterized the group. It is a commission criminal offender record information that will be in a compo.sed of private citizens who are not compensated. fully automated criminal justice information system I serve as its chairman. We are just getting underway that will service all of the law enforcement agencies in by investigating the state of recordkeeping in Massa- the Commonwealth. This statute created two adminis- chusetts, the level of security that exists, the amount trative units. One is the Criminal History Systems of technological attention being given to matters of Board, which has operating control over the criminal privacy and security. We expect to take testimony from justice information system. It is a regulatory—body citizens and to respond to individual complaints. We composed of representatives of the data users law already have started to receive them and they follow enforcement officials, rehabilitation officials, and court the usual pattern of objections to the use of the social officials. It is an in-house professional group. In addi- security number on driver's licenses, the lack of file tion to the Board, there was created a Security and security in welfare offices, the selling of lists of custo- Privacy Council consisting of nine members, seven mers or members to consumer reporting and mail list public members who work on a pro bono basis, and companies. representatives of the Attorney General's office and the The third development in Massachusetts symbolizes chairman of the Criminal History Systems Board. I v/hat I said earlier this morning when I suggested that serve as chairman of this Council. The Security and the privacy issue has come of age. The computer- Privacy Council's function is to study, monitor, audit, privacy issue has the enormous political sex appeal. and present recommendations to the Board with regard Not to be outdone by the Governor, the General Court to matters bearing on security of the system and the of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, which is its privac—y of the criminal j—ustice files. It really has no legislature, has appointed a commission to study priv- power none whatsoever other than the power of acy. Of course, its efforts will be largely duplicative of recommendation. All power resides in the Board. For- the Governor's commission, although it probably will tunately, the Council seems to have captured the good be more action oriented because it is composed of nine will of the Board and the two organizations are work- State representatives and three public members. It, ing in reasonable harmony. too, isjust underway in its work. In the period between the enactment of the statute I have described the Massachusetts scene simply to and the present, very, very detailed regulations have indicate to you that considerable activity is going on been drafted by the Board with the advice of the at the State level and the object will be to place a bill Council. These deal in great detail with regard to before the entire legislature. The executive and legis- such matters as security of data, access to data, dis- lative branches of dozens of States already have be- semination of data, the purging and sealing of data. come active in trying to deal with this problem. One of Anyone interested in seeing a fully developed regula- the really significant problems that face policymakers, tory system would be well advised to look at the regu- in particular those at the operating levels of govern- lations proposed for the Massachusetts criminal justice ment, such as many of you people, is to avoid the system. In my judgment, it represents a rather reason- zealots, both the zealots of government efficiency on able balance between the needs of the law enforcement the one hand and the zealots of civil liberties on the community and the rights of the individual, although other. Unfortunately, many of the proposals that are I do not agree with everything in the current draft. appearing are technologically unsound, administra- Of course, these regulations are reinforced by a strong tively unworkable, or placebos that really accomplish statute that prohibits the movement of criminal justice little because they offer people no effective procedural information outside the criminal justice community mechanism either in terms of gaining access to their and those governmental organizations authorized by files or in terms of challenging inaccuracies in the statute to have access to criminal justice information. file. If there is a single important role for govern- If properly enforced, this is a very limiting standard. mental policymakers, it is to help the legislators find There is no legal way an employer, an insurance com- a mid-course between the extremes; otherwise we will pany, or a credit-rating or credit reporting agency will end up with extremely bad legislation. I think you be allowed to gain access to the Massachusetts crimi- must face the fact that given the appeal of the privacy nal justice system. issue, there will be legislation and the real question is The second development in Massachusetts is the how good can be make it. 15THE VIEWS OF THE COMPUTER AND BUSINESS EQUIPMENT MANUFACTURERS ASSOCIATION (CBEMA) Peter F. McCloskey President, Computer and Business Equipment Manufacturers Association 1828 L Street, N.W., Wasiiington, D.C. 20036 Thank you and good afternoon. As noted already, These are genuine concerns, but how can we best President Nixon has increased dramatically the im- address the range of issues before us? I believe our portance of our deliberations here, and I hope that society must look at Privacy, Confidentiality and Se- there are some staff members from the Domestic Coun- curity of information from a systems viewpoint. In cil with us because the issues raised at the November this examination different concepts are needed at dif- Conference and addressed again at this one cover most ferent levels and various groups play different roles. of the issues before Vice-President Ford's Committee. CBEMA has been actively concerned with the ex- CBEMA has long believed that society must set the panding impact of data handling techniques on society rules for privacy so that administrators, systems de- for many years. As awareness of these developments signers and equipment vendors can implement the con- grew within the Industry, we established a Committee fidentiality rules and security systems to preserve that on Privacy and Security. Through this committee, level of privacy. In this context, I have three conclu- CBEMA has followed closely the growth of interest sions to discuss with you this afternoon. in the Congress, other legislative bodies, the Executive First. Information Protection: Information can be Branch of the Federal Government and in the States protected better in a computer system than in a manila in the subject of Governmental use of information tech- folder. nology. We therefore, welcome the opportunity to par- Second. How Much Security Is Needed? Security ticipate in conferences such as this since one of our expenditures must be based on cost benefit analyses. activities is to promote informed public discussion of The extent of security measures depends on the assets the part data handling techniques, and computers in to be protected and the perceived risk. particular, play in the collection and administration Third. How Much Security Is Available? Better of information about people. security products are coming in response to perceived Our recently published CBEMA statement, "The market demand but I must note that government de- Role of Computers in Privacy, Confidentiality and mand seems to be well ahead of other markets. Data Security," addresses the issues as we see them Last November this conference addressed issues fac- and copies are available in the auditorium. This state- ing the government manager regarding Privacy and ment is the first in a planned series of publications Security in Government Computer Systems. I reflected designed to stimulate thought and discussion. We have on the views stated at that conference during my re- published the speech given by Ruth Davis at the turn from East Europe and the USSR last week. It is November Conference. We think Dr. Davis provides a very clear that those are societies in which information thoughtful overview of this issue as a concerned Gov- is secure. And, it is just as clear that it is not the use ernment Official. We are distributing this speech to of computers that determines the character of a society. the Congress, State legislatures, the Federal and State Franz Kafka in his novel "The Trial" found little Executive Branches because we think it's important. need for a computer to ensnare his victims. In the The activity of the CBEMA Commitee on Privacy United States and other Western nations, however, the and Security is based on two convictions: computer is beginning to be cast as a villain. I don't agree. I agree with Alan Westin, who sees the com- • Preservation of the individual's right to privacy puter as the catalyst causing a reaction between long is a fundamental goal of our society. established trends towards Institutionalization and Meritocracy on the one hand and new concepts of • The use and advancement of information proc- personal freedom and group dignity and rights on the essing techniques are vital to solving the prob- other hand. lems presented by our increasingly complex so- In this connection, the Canadian Government Re- ciety. port: "Privacy and Computers" notes that not all claims to privacy fall within any reasonable concept of Concern for privacy is not a new subject. Since privacy. The demand for access to personal files can the beginning of recorded history, there has been con- also be seen as an attempt to alter the distribution cern about the collection of information and its use as of political power. And, the arguments about "com- it affects individual privacy. Each age and society has pute—r errors" are essentialy arguments about defama- continually reviewed the balance between the rights tion even if the context is new. of the individual to be left alone and the needs of 16society to obtain, use and disseminate data concerning pany to be used for agreed upon specific purposes, him. Today's complex society and advanced technology such as medical treatment, bank loans, insurance, or gives this concern a new dimension. As we stated to employment evaluation. However, the individual will the Federal Communications Commission in 1968: want assurance that confidentiality will be maintained and that unauthorized use of the data will not occur. "It is pertinent to note that privacy questions involving Making good on the promise of confidentiality requires stored data are not the result of the development of computer a variety of human and technological safeguards. and data processing techniques. The increased concentration The third aspect, data security, deals with means of o pf uted ra ,ta whw io lu eld conh ta rv ie butd ie nv gelo toped thein ia mn my ediev ae cn yt, oa fnd theth pe ric vo am c- y assuring confidentiality— protecting data from unau- problem, has at the same time, contributed in major respects thorized disclosure, modification, or destruction, either to our ability to provide for the secure storage and use of accidental or intentional. Data security encompasses information." the protection of all files, manual or computerized. It can take the form of physical protection of the files, Certainly, the computer, with its ability to process a variety of administrative procedures, and technical vast amounts of data rapidly and economically, has safeguards in computers. As information systems have proved its worth to mankind. It also has complicated become more complex, data security requires addition- the effort to preserve the rights of the individual. We al measures to control access to files by those not in should remember, however, that Alan Westin reported the central installation itself. to the November Conference in his global review of Resolving the issues of where policy and regulatory recent studies on privacy that none of the studies could responsibility for private information in Government document specific episodes where automated record- systems resides is facilitated by considering whether keeping created a new loss of personal liberties. During the issue is a case of privacy, confidentiality or data the past ten years, the growth of computers has been security. It is the traditional responsibility of the legis- impressive. lature to develop, evaluate and formulate into law In 1964 there were less than 20,000 general pur- the sound public policies needed by society, in this pose computers installed in this country. Today there case to establish the balance between the individual's are over 60,000. In the Federal Government alone right to privacy and society's need for information. there are currently over 4,000 general purpose com- Legislative policy setting is often complicated by the puters installed whereas ten years ago the number was fact that privacy issues usualy occur as ancillary parts less than 2,000. Now, the total number of CPU's in- of legislation addressing other subjects. The data gath- stalled is much greater, but we are looking at those ering and research sections of the Family Assistance systems that are most likely to be used to process per- Plan proposed in the last Congress are an example. It sonal information. is also the legislature's duty to set the rules for confi- In addition, a recent Kiplinger Washington Letter, dentiality requirements and thereby guide the execu- indicated that the biggest growth industry in the Unit- tive branch in its execution of the law. Our census stat- ed States during the next ten years will be public utes are a clear example of such an approach. service. Government at all levels will grow rapidly, Out of the controversy and debate over public poli- particularly State and Local Governments. We believe cies, several principles have become increasingly ac- that this anticipated growth in public service will result cepted. in the continued application of computers to effectively When Government or private industry places per- handle the data this is vital to Government operations. sonal data on file, the individual should enjoy maxi- In an era when organizational judgments about peo- mum access to records containing information about ple affect many rights, benefits and opportunities, this himself. He should have the right to reach and check projected growth highlights the need for continuing the accuracy and completeness of the record, particu- review. The key to an effective approach to resolving larly when it is used to determine rights, benefits or this concern is understanding that three intertwined opportunities. He should have the right to contest the aspects of these issues exist: Privacy, Confidentiality, record in an appropriate proceeding. and Data Security. When information is collected from an individual The overriding consideration, of course, is an indi- for a given purpose, the use should be confined to that vidual's right to privacy. This right involves such basic purpose. If the collector wishes to use the information policy questions as: What personal information should for an additional purpose, he should make that clear be collected? By whom? For what purposes? Who originally or obtain consent later for the new use. should have access to what information? For what The relevance of specific items of personal informa- purposes? LJnder what limitations? The problem of tion should be established, or the items should be de- preserving privacy was with us long before computers leted from the file. The indiscriminate transfer of in- came on the scene. It has existed since people started formation on individuals from one organization to keeping written records. another should be prohibited. Confidentiality on the other hand involves the treat- Once requirements for confidentiality are estab- ment of personal information after it is on file. An lished, safeguards for private information can be iden- individual may wish to keep most facts about his per- tified. CBEMA member companies, other industrial sonal life to himself. However, he may also be willing firms, concerned Government agencies, and academic to give some confidential data to an agency or com- researchers have been working actively in this area. 17: Consideration must be given to the entire security Parker reports 24 cases of computer abuse occurring environment if effective protection is to be established. since 1967 in Local State and Federal Governments Traditional sound and prudent business practices facilities. There were should apply for manual or computer recordkeeping. These include such basic and necessary items as physi- 5 Thefts of address lists cal security, appropriate personnel programs and 4 Vandalism cases guidelines, separation of responsibilities, provisions for 4 Manipulation of Checks checks and l)alances, accountability, and appropriate 4 Confidentiality violations audit procedures. 3 Manipulation of payroll files and checks Our members and others recommend a variety of 2 Unauthorized sales of EDP services and safeguards. They have helped work out procedural 2 Vote counting frauds. techniques for improving confidentiality; increased awareness and provided education for users so they In 16 cases the main perpetrator was an EDP em- may apply appropriate safeguards. As you will hear ployee, in 5, another Government employee and in 3 later they are continuing to study data security under they were outsiders. Assuming theft of address lists is the user's operating conditions, with the aim of devel- not considered an invasion of privacy, we see that 4 oping still more devices and techniques. They are also our of 24 or 1/6 of these cases relate to privacy. providing Government with technical counsel: taking Further, none of these cases involved manipulation of part in professional forums, as well as in academic and computer programs. sociological research, aimed at better understanding of The point is that beyond the safeguard capabilities the issues and problems. built into the computer system itself, basic data secur- The com])uter manufacturers' most direct contribu- ity is best provided by traditional protective measures. tions are in the development of safeguards that can In the installation location this includes locked com- be built into the computer system. These safeguards puter rooms, identification cards, fire and theft pro- were defined in the November Conference as "self- tection, and the employment of trustworthy personnel, protected" systems. I'm sure conference speakers will particularly programmers and machine room oper- address specific aspects of the problem of constructing ators. Professor Westin observes in his report for the .self-protected systems. National Academy of Sciences, which was based on Since CBEMA's viewpoint covers all systems manu- actual case studies, that the basic physical and admin- factured by all member companies. I must address this istrative safeguards are judged by their own manage- problem from a very broad base. But trends are quite ment to be inadequately employed in many of the or- ganizations surveyed. evident. First. I think security has become an accepted issue andIt vs ah ro iu el td y ob fe tr ye pc eo sgn ofiz ce od mpth ua tt erw sit ih n t Gh oe vel rar ng me enn tu ,mb ae nr d by computer professionals. In contrast to the situation of several years ago. many people outside the military because of the complexity and scope of installed appli- requirements sector now see systems security as a pri- cations, each user must review available security alter- mary design goal. Certainly this is the reason many natives including cost-benefit trade-offs in order to de- termine appropriate safeguards that meet his specific of you are here today. needs. As managers of Government programs provid- Second, the manufacturers have undertaken to incor- ing services to citizens, your primary objective is to porate ajipropriate security techniques and facilities get the job done within budget. We must not make into their standard product lines. Security product information so secure that doing the job becomes im- planning has been raised to high corporate levels in possible. most computer systems companies and is therefore a Speaking of balancing the job of providing govern- .serious commitment. ment services against preventing invasions of privacy, Third, there is developing a heavy concentration on we think the diversity of proposed legislation on the self protecting computer systems. This is the natural privacy issue should be looked at. Dr. Ruth Davis at result of our tendency as manufacturers and users of the November Conference, recognized this problem. sophisticated technology to look to that technology to "In 1973," she said, "some seventy bills concerned resolve difficult problems. with protection of individual privacy were pending in Certainly such sophisticated approaches are neces- the fifty state legislatures. Passage of any significant sary. In some systems they are the only means of pro- number of these bills, along with passage of some of viding the required level of security. At the same time the bills introduced into Congress could easily result let us not lose sight of the risks to be protected against. in an unacceptable morass of conflicting requirements Donn Parker in his study of "Computer Abuse" which on service industries, technology and regulatory or was completed for the National Science Foundation last judicial organizations. Some national coherence must November, listed vandalism, information or property exist for any realism to be present in arriving at se- theft, direct financial fraud or theft, and unauthorized curity in automation adequate to protect individual use or sale of services as risks to be faced. We should privacy." include natural di.saster and accidental disclosures in So far this year, we have noted the introduction of this list also. Of these risks only theft or accidental dis- more than 20 new bills in state legislatures. The pro- closure of information relate to invasion of privacy. liferation of bills being introduced dramatically points 18— — up the need for a clear understanding of the benefits newly activated Committee on Individual Privacy. versus—the cost trade-offs to be obtained. All interested It is CBEMA's belief that if the collection of infor- parties Government, user organizations, manufactur- mation and use of information processing techniques ers, other concerned organizations, and individuals are given proper consideration, they will prove to be need to examine, study and understand this subject. a benefit both for the individual and for society. We Those concerned with privacy, should recognize that recognize that balance is needed to ensure protection the really sensitive information usually exists in man- of individual rights while at the same time not inhibit- ual files, therefore, legislation must consider both man- ing the general benefits to society that are possible ual and automated records. Negative information is through disciplined use of modern technology. A prop- just as damaging whether it is obtained from a com- er balance in each of these areas is essential and puter or the familiar manila folder. This is one point achievable today. that must be fully understood by Vice President Ford's A CALL FOR NON-PROPRIETARY SECURITY SYSTEMS A. G. W. Biddle Executive Director, Computer Industry Association, Encino, California 91316 When we left this auditorium last November it was The development of secure systems will necessitate evident that solutions to the problem of data privacy balancing the many tradeoffs; systems architecture, and security required the development of new laws, hardware design, software design, operational con- new techniques and new technology. As Dr. Davis said straints, initial cost and ongoing operating costs. The in her closing remarks, "The problems of settling the achievement of our goal to prevent the violation of problems of individual privacy, namely: individuals rights and prevent the fraudulent use of The desires of the individual to exercise control both data and data processing systems necessitates over the collection of information about himself, and careful and objective selection from among the many The desires of the individual to exercise some alternative solutions that are available. measure of control over the use of information about The problem is sufficiently complex so as to require himself, once it is collected, inputs from personnel with expertise in systems archi- are the responsibility of courts. Congress and state leg- tecture, programming, cryptography, psychology, ac- islatures." counting, and a myriad of other specialties. It is clearly Last week. President Nixon established a special an undertaking that will require the commitment of a task force under Vice President Ford with responsibil- significant amount of both human and financial re- ity to develop legislative programs addressed to these sources over an extended period of time. And therein problems. In doing so, he further focused the attention lies the problem. of the nation on the need for privacy and security and As I see it, there are presentl—y two entities who escalated the need for technical safegu —ards for both could undertake this complex task IBM and perhaps present an —d future systems. It is this the area of other systems manufacturers on a proprietary basis or technology that I would like to discuss. NBS working through a voluntary industry/govern- The technological development of secure data proc- ment cooperative program. I don't think that either essing systems represents a complex, expensive and of these alternatives will work. time consuming undertaking. The problems that must Although IBM has the resources to do the job be solved, as has been seen during the course of this they have already committed eight million dollars a R&D and preceding conferences on the subject, range from year —for five years to a major data security the relatively simple to the almost insurmountable. effort they indicate that only the results of the first However, thanks to the work of the National Bu- two years worth of effort will be placed in the public — reau of Standards, Department of Health, Education & domain presumably the remaining effort will be for Welfare, the National Science Foundation, AFIPS, proprietary products and programs. ACM and IBM among others, a great deal of work I personally think that this approach would be detri- has already been done to define the extent and com- mental to the user, the public and the industry as a plexity of the tasks ahe —ad. One thing has already be- whole. We need to develop technical solutions th—at are come abundantly clear the design and implementa- equally applicable to all hardware and software both tion of secure systems will involve and impact every present and future systems regardless of who makes part of the typical computer system; programmers, them. It would be all too easy to develop security sys- operators, service personnel, CPU, memory peripheral tems involving firmware, encryption and other tech- and terminal hardware, operating systems and appli- niques that would effectively lock out intruders and cations software as well as communication channels interlopers and competitors. It would be relatively and links. easy to argue that release of the design details neces- 19— sary to interconnect non-IBM terminals, peripherals ties of the Laboratory would be under the direction of or applications software might violate the integrity of a seven man board of directors selected to represent a the security system. Needless to say, reverse engineer- cross section of the interest groups involved. They ing would also be out of the question. As a conse- would work solely for the laboratory and sever all ties quence, I'm afraid that the catch phrase of the late with their respective employees. '70s would become "A Secure System is a Single The lab would draw qualified technical personnel Source System." To avoid this, I don't think any from industry, government and user organizations and manufacturer of systems hardware or terminals should when a])propriate augment their internal capabilities be permitted to develop and install encryption devices through the creation of special task forcesor the letting or other security oriented systems that are unique to of development contracts. It would be charged with their hardware or proprietary in nature. responsibility to develop a hierarchy of security sys- Rather, it seems to me that we must develop a tems and devices suitable for installation on current framewo —rk for the implementation of multiple level and future systems. Appropriate certification proce- controls a set of locks of varyi —ng integrity to limit dures would also be required. The design of—the "locks" access to authorized individuals to protect data in would be standardized and available to all hardware storage and during transmission and to audit the and software manufacturers and users alike. However, activity within the total system. The technology, hard- the "keys" or techniques needed to make a specific ware and software systems should be equally available system secure would be assembled by the user follow- to all manufacturers of data processing equipment ing approved procedures. This might involve the selec- these are the locks. The keys should be solely in the tion and installation of a unique combination of read hands of the user in the same way that you can pur- only chips in the mainframe and each terminal: it chase a range of combination padlocks from a variety might involve the creation of algorithm or any of a of supplies and set the combination yourself. number of other techniques. forI tm he ent ei so tn ae bld isea hr ml ei ne tr t oh fat anNB iS nduis sta rypos ws ii db ele cf oo oc pa el rap to ii vn et The essential point is that—the user would have con- program to develop the soltuions we need. Unfortu- trol of the security system not his suppliers. Since the basic design and operation of the system would be nately, a voluntary, cooperative effort often fails unless standardized, (albeit one of a family of standards) the economic motivation of the participants is strong. the laboratory would be able to develop certification For example, the Brooks Bill, which was passed in tests to validate the level of security that does in fact 1965, called for the voluntary development of I/O exist in any given installation. Undoubtedly, such cer- interface standards in order to increase the cost effec- tification would probably become an essential part of tiveness and utilization of peripheral devices. Eight the financial audit in the years ahead. wye ea rr es ol nate tr hewe daa yre thn eo Bc rl oos oe kr sto BilI l/O was sta pn ad sa sr ed ds —t fh oa rn tw he e In summary, I believe that a neutral body should simple reason that the typical manufacturer seeks to be charged with responsibility for developing and dis- achieve maximum product differentiation in order to seminating technological solutions to the data security protect his market position. For this reason, I don't problem. The laboratory, through certification, would, believe that a voluntary industry/government effort to a certain extent, be able to mandate compliance- will achieve the objectives sought by the user. just as LTnderwriters Laboratory does today. As an alternative. I believe that we should seriously There are undoubtedly problems associated with my consider the creation of a federally chartered non-profit proposed solution. Means will have to be provided to "Super l^nderwriters Laboratory." Although time con- protect proprietary data supplied to the laboratory by straints only allow me to suggest a conceptual frame- manufacturers. A "public" hearing process might be work, let's see how this might solve our problem. Set required to allow for comment on any proposed system up somewhat like the Financial Accounting Standards or standard. These problems can be solved. Board, the Laboratory would be funded by the govern- In doing so, we will increase the likelihood that se- ment, producers and users of data processing systems. cure systems can be available on a timely and eco- In time, an increasing portion of the funding would nomic basis. It certainly represents an improvement come from royalties and certification fees. The activi- over a dozen non-compatible, propriety solutions. 20— THE VIEWS OF THE ASSOCIATION OF DATA PROCESSING SERVICE ORGANIZATIONS John B. Christiansen Independence Computing & Software Corp., W. CoUingswood, New Jersey 08107 ADAPSO, the association of Data Processing Service for one purpose should not be used for another Organizations, is one of some 2,000 active trade associ- purpose; ations in the United States. These trade associations provide commerical and trade information to their • Untimely or erroneous information about an in- member companies, and also to local, state and federal dividual should be subject to amendment or cor- rection governmental bodies. ; ADAPSO represents 262 companies with 381 • There should be no personal data record keeping branches or a total of over 600 units. The computer system whose very existence is secret. industry according to the 1973 Industry report has 1,700 companies that employ 125,000 people. The Unfortunately, however, the bills proposed to date gross revenues of these companies totaled 3.23 billion i thn ec sl eude cow mo mr ed ni dn ag bla end gor ae ls st ,ri tc hti av te dc el ma ou ns se ts rato teac ac nom ip gl ni os rh - dollars in 1973. Because of the divergent functions ance to the special economic characteristics and prob- performed by the services segment of the computer industry, ADAPSO is currently organized into 4 sec- lems of the computer industry and especiallyitsservices segment. tions, and there could be more in time. ADAPSO calls on its industry to pursue an intensi- 1. The first, and the original section, The Data fied effort to ensure that whatever government regula- Centers Section, is concerned with providing local tion or legislation is necessary, is undertaken only on representation to the member companies in their an informed basis and with full knowledge of all the respective states. consequences. Further, ADAPSO calls attention to the body of 2. The Remote Processing Services Section is espe- knowledge about the social aspects of the Privacy cially concerned with presenting member com- Problem which was gathered and published by a gov- pany interests before the FCC; ernment-sponsored committee. The report, available at 3. The Software Industry Association is heavily in- GPO book stores, is entitled, "Records, Computers and volved in government areas with particular em- the Rights of Citizens," and has been the subject of an phasis on procurement, on standards and on soft- August 3, 1973 ADAPSO Bulletin. This report could ware protection; provide the basis for establishing standards sensitive to the high rate of technological change, sensitive to 4. The Data Facility Management Section is mainly the esoteric, complicated economic structure of the concerned with documenting and analyzing the computer industry and its services segment, and de- functions of, and inquiring into the scope of signed to effectively protect the privacy of the in- services performed by Data Facility Management dividual. ADAPSO further recommends that local, Companies. state and federal agencies publicize the findings of the All sections provide a broad and interesting educa- Committee report, and respectfully recommends all tional program for member companies and their em- government agencies establish guidelines based on the findings of the report. ployees. Public Should be Informed of Costs Statement of Position The Association of Data Processing Service Organi- One of the primary functions of government in a zations, Inc., believes that individuals, as is their right, democracy is to disseminate information to its citizens, should receive every reasonable protection against the because of the widely held belief that the foundation unauthorized use and distribution of personal infor- of an effective, active, stable democratic government mation from data banks. ADAPSO, without agreeing is an informed citizenry. However, there is currently an enormous burden on the taxpayer to support the t th ha et il ne tg ei ns tla ot fio mn osis t n pe rc oe ps os sa er dy la et git sh li as tiot nime t, o da ag tr ee :es with c clo al sl se ic ft ii eo dn oa rnd whm oa si ent ce in ra cn uc lae tio of n i isnf ro er sm ta rt ii cto en d w ih nic sh omi es • Information gathered from or about an individual way. Proposed legislation regulating computer data 21banks contains provisions requiring computing firms required to feed thebureaucracy up-to-date information to report on the nature and use of their data to desig- on their mailing lists, accounts receivable files, and the nated authorities. ADAPSO urges its industry and the like, would be disastrous for the industry. government to provide the public with more informa- tion about the issues and costs involved in policing the Efforts to Standardize Personal Data thousands of computer systems maintaining and trans- mitting personal data. There are government agencies urgingthe standardi- zation of codes for personal identification, location, Other Economic Considerations time, personal characteristics, and medical and physi- cal status descriptors. The building and maintenance of a broadly covered, It is obvious that universally applied codes in these universal computerized data bank is very costly. There areas would aid in the accumulation and interchange isa market for this kind of information, but this market of meaningful personal data, and would reduce the must provide enough economic incentive to justify the cost of building a data bank. However, the key code huge on-going costs of maintenance. Because of this necessary to concentrate personal data from several cost factor, it would not be possible for a commercial, sources is some universally accepted system of linking computerized data bank to secretly exist that held this coded data to an individual. The pragmatic com- current information about a sizeable percentage of the puter systems designer will specify Social Security population. ADAPSO believes that these cost factors, number as this identifier unless the public is aware of along with new regulations defining ownership of per- the dangers of the universal use of the number as a key sonal data, would sufficiently limit proliferation of this to personal and private data. It must be apparent that data. On the other hand, the cost of a government the computer systems designer in industry is only bureaucracy required to protect against commercial following the lead of the computer systems designer computer data banks that target specific groups or in most government agencies where Social Security classes of individuals would be considerable. Indeed, number has really become Federal Identification Num- the size of this bureaucracy would not be restricted ber. ADAPSO recommends that government and in- by the balance of costs in the marketplace, and the dustry efforts to standardize the encoding of personal economic impact on the thousands of small, independ- data descriptors for the purpose of information inter- ent data processing service companies who would be change include the question ofpersonal data ownership. THE PROFESSIONAL ASPECTS OF PRIVACY AND CONFIDENTIALITY Robert W. Rector Executive Director, The American Federation of Information Processing Societies, Inc. 210 Summit Avenue, Montvale, New Jersey 07645 While I wholeheartedly support the need for coherent professional societies in information processing or legislation, technical guidelines, and improved hard- closely allied fields. I am sure that many of you here ware and software mechanisms for handling privacy today are members of at least one of the thirteen Con- and security in computer systems, I submit that we are stituent Societies that form the American Federation remiss if we do not take some time in a series of con- of Information Processing Societies, Inc. What might ferences on Pri —vacy and Security to talk about the true be our chagrin is that this meeting is not held under role of people not just people as "passwords," "in- our sponsorship, or that of one of our Societies, is quirers," or "authorized personnel." I mean, in par- mitigated by the thought that former conferences and ticular, the information processing professional and his workshops sponsored by the Societies have done much organizations. Congressman Jack Brooks alerted us to to stimulate and focus the interest in privacy matters the fact that when we deal with complex computer that exists in government today. Probably the first bases systems, no legislative action can be effective serious statement of the problem, along with a sug- without the correspondin —g technological advances to gested remedy was Paul Baran's paper Communica- support legislative efforts and I add that no techno- tions, Computers and People at the 1965 Fall Joint logical advance is effective without a sense of profes- Computer Conference. Other landmark papers are to sional responsibility among the people involved. be found in the Proceedings of subsequent Joint Com- I was surprised in reviewing the proceedings of our puter Conferences. earlier conference that no one identified the role of the Let—us then look at the role that the professional "professional" as such. Yet at that meeting almost all plays as a part of the problem and as part of the of the participants probably belonged to one or more solution. Certainly it is easy to demonstrate that the 22professional is central to all aspects of the privacy Wirtz in January 1970. Although it covered the larger problem. question of "Professionalism in the Computer Field," the same concerns that bring us together today, were — • As a consumer The au —thorized recipient of out- present then. They said, "The general public is coming put and the supplier of input who, in the higher eche- to recognize that larger data bases pose threats to lons at least, should be concerned about what is privacy. With large amounts of sensitive data in a "proper" and "useful." These customers are often data base, the competence and ethics of the persons members of the formal professional societies such as who design and operate such systems become vital." ' the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, In attacking the problem, four groups or publics the American Medical Association, the American Bar were identified as requiring protection. These were Association. The fact that such user oriented societies (1) The "general public," (2) the "consumers of com- have specialized subgroups to deal with computer based puter products and services," (3) the "employers of information systems is recognition of this role. computer people" and (4) the "employees" themselves. In each case the degree and type of protection is — • As a producer The systems analyst and the ap- different. plication programmer are the backbone of the member- It is the protection of the general public welfare ship in the Constituent Societies of our American Fed- that provides the real motivation for our interest in eration of Information Processing Societies. privacy today. The protection of the other three groups may offer solutions to these same problems. The tech- • As a servicer— certainly in the classic sense of the n si pq ou ne ss e mth ea ct ham na iy smsbe ofem pp rl ofo ey se sd ioni an lc slu wde hoth he avc elas bs aic ndere d- systems programmer, but also in the ancillary function together to form the professional society. They include of operations, there is a growing association at the certification, licensing, accreditation and codes of management level, at least, with the professional socie- ethics. I submit that all of these techniques can provide ties Ano dper fa int ai ln lg y,in I t rh ei gs ref tiel td o. say, ass Ti hst ean rc oe lein ofso cl ev ri tn ifg ict ah te ionp —ro ab nlem afs fit rh ma at tiw oe n bn yow a f ga oc ve -. — ernmental or private organiza —tion that an individual • As an intruder The evidence already presented has met certain qualifications can be a strong influ- points outthat the unauthorized entrant to data systems ence on the field. But certification demands standards; is not uneducated or untrained. He may be the most a priori standards of knowledge and performance are "professional" of the professionals. Since few of our necessary to attest to and maintain competence. Then professional societies have taken steps to act on cases there can follow the recognition and codification of of malfeasance, we may assume there are intruders in "commonly accepted practice" that do much to stabi- the ranks. lize a profession. Surely then there is a close interaction between the There are, of course, very complex problems that professional in information processing and problems surround certification. The approach that is now being dealing with privacy and s —ecurity. If we approach —the implemented by our professional societies is the estab- problem through people professional people we lishment of The Institute for the Certification of Com- should ask the question what are the steps that have puter Professionals. This organization is investigating been taken or can be taken, to solve the problems that all aspects of the problem of certification. AFIPS for in the end effect all of us? But first a caution: If the its part has developed all aspects of the problem of thesis is to promote professionalism to solve all our certification. AFIPS for its part has developed what it problems, we may be in trouble. If professionalism hopes wil be a definitive set of job descriptors and equates to Godliness, we may end up as zealots without skills for the computer programmer. This is meant to solving the real problems of the world. I trust none of be a set of meaningful descriptions of tasks and skills us will take such a cavalier attitude for there are real that will find sufficiently universal use to give rise to contributions that have been made by the professional at least de facto standards. This material will be used societies in data processing. The critical question is, in turn by the ICCP to study the problem of training "Are we doing enough?" and certification. Over simplifying the purpose of a professional soci- Simultaneously with this project AFIPS has carried ety, let us describe its two major functions as protec- on a second effort. This effort also had its genesis in tion and promotion through education. Both of the the same area of certification. The concept is one of terms, protection and promotion are used broadly. systems certification. It asserts that it might be possi- They cover not only the professional himself but they ble to certify that a system, particularly a system in refer to a number of audiences or groups and the which the public had a third party interest, met the various interfaces between these groups. I shall try to proposed specifications. In subsequent workshops the identify some of these elements with particular refer- leaders came to the conclusion that it was currently ence to the problems of privacy and security. impossible to define the necessary standards for sys- The AFIPS interest in these questions which had tems certification and that itwas difficulteven to specify surfaced at all of the Joint Computer Conferences in t Rh oe unl da tt ae blsi ext Mi ees etw ia ns g cb hr ao iu rg eh dt bi ynt to hes Hha or np orf ao bc lu es Ww ii lt lh arda Su1 mP mr io tfes As vi eo .n ,al Mi os nm tvi an let ,he N.C J.omp 07u Gt 4e 5r . Field, 1970, AFIPS Press, 210 23preferred practices. Further discussions led AFIPS to it possible for the individual who is motivated to en- set up a Systems Improvement Committee to explore gage in continuing self education. what approaches might be taken toward developing It should be noted that through these procedures, professional solutions to the problems caused by mal- many of the mechanisms that are required for secure design or malfunction of computer based information systems operations are already in place. If not, the systems. hardware and software needed to do the job can easily To date, the committee has attempted to pinpoint be produced, once the specifications for security and questions which should be asked by any manager as he confidentiality have been set by the public or by its da ett se im gp nt es d t ao nddec wii ld le pw eh re ft oh re mr io nr tn ho et deh si is res dys wt ae ym .s are well ca ru it th io car liz qe ud estr ie opr nes be en ft oa rti eve us s. toI dab ye -l —ie wv he atth dat o wth eis wai ns t?a Work is now nearing completion on a manual cover- Or rather, what does the public want? Certainly, in ing privacy and security. This is the first of an in- theory at least, the public should not oppose the col- tended series of Systems Review Manuals. It will be lection of factual information and the efficient storage field tested and published in 1974 by AFIPS Press. and retrieval of this information by a modern com- AFIPS attaches a great deal of importance to this puter based system. On the other hand, the concern effort. While emphasis is focused on the civil, public that follows the expose of the abuse and exploitation supported, and private systems whose maldesign could of large data bases under time sharing networks should have an adverse impact on soci —ety or on individuals, have been equally predictable. Studies have shown that the same type of critical —review pointed toward cor- every instance of computer abuse has its counterparts rection rather than cure is required for all major in an existing manual system. All of these facts pointed information systems. out deficiencies in theeducational process. Anticipation I believe these examples are indicative of the in- of this should help bridge the interface between the creased interest that professional societies have dis- consumers of computer products and the general public played in formal "Professionalism." It should also be on one hand, and the suppliers and professionals in noted that AFIPS has recently amended its Constitu- data processing, on the other. t s ei nto tan nd mat eo r md bsi en rac sno hr d ipo ppr .ra at ce Atict e ch s oe ma mi s im tap tr ero eev qe u hm i ee r an e dt m ee dno tf bfp yor ro Df ce oos n ns s ni to in ta Bu .l - ff eo srW sih b oa o ntt ah l i sts oh cen iee g te e id n ee sed ra sl hi os up lua b dlc i po c ln at a ni nn d au ni tn h eg e dup p cl r aa o tn f ie oso nsf ai loe nd pau l r.c oa gt P ri r ao o mn - Parker has been appointed to implement an active of bold and imaginative dimensions that will bring program. Some of our Constituent Societies have re- the challenges of data processing into true prospective. cently passed codes of ethics and rules of conduct. It is unfortunate that much of the interest in privacy All of these actions are part of the historic pattern and security comes on with negative overtones. It would that a discipline must take if it expects to develop be equally unfortunate, of course, if the professional competent technical performance and ethical behavior. did not warn the general public of the pitfalls and social Unfortunately it is not easy to fit all of information costs of a proposed system. p bcr r eio etc nee rs ois o bi n tn— ag inei exn dpt eo r tt ht ih rse oe u—c gl ha isss ai rc pea rql u oi lm r oo e nl d gd , e. diW t ph ei u rl s ie u oa dlt lh oye f e h gs a es nse en rt n ai o la t -l proJ fu es st sia os nalrea rl ani ks s.th Ae n re ee ced ntfo sr tue dd yuca ot fio pn row gi rt ah mi mn ert 'h se ized formal training and a period of practical appren- attitudes shows a fantastic difTerence in understanding ticeship or practice to perfect the accompanying skills. among the professionals over legal matters involving There is, in fact, no common curriculum, no univer- the use of the programs of others (including proprie- sally accepted body of knowledge, nor any performance tary programs), unauthorized use of a time sharing standards. There are compelling reasons to argue that system, and other questionable practices. Here, open we should never expect to reach such a steady state. discussion and education would do much to clarify the The field is changing too fast! We have tapped too situation. many other fields for talent. As a result we have ended I am optimistic that these conferences on privacy with a you —ng, bright, versatile, and aggressive set of and security will do much to develop understanding individuals all challenged by the compu —ter and its among professionals and the legislators. Hopefully, it application to the real world's problems but some- will be done with the approval and understanding of what prone at times to see if they could break the the general public. If this does not happen we shall operating system, "just because it's there." all lose. The other part of the challenge is the promotion of In a larger sense I hope that the discussions that we professional objectives through education. In the tech- have had here, will serve as a practicum for the pro- nical aspects, no one can fault the excellent educational fessional society. What has happened in this area can job the societies have done through their publications, happen in other types of applications of computerized conferences and workshops. Their members share ex- systems. It behooves the professional and his society perience, help educate newcomers to the field and make to think and act as professionals. 24— DATA PROCESSING MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION STATEMENT ON PRIVACY AND SECURITY IN COMPUTER SYSTEMS Donn W. Sanford Executive Director, DPMA, Park Ridge, Illinois 60068 The Data Processing Management Association is the wherein James Madison declared that government has largest management-oriented professional society in the "twin duties" to "secure the public good" while "se- field of information processing. As managers, the more curing the citizens' "private rights." Inherent in this than twenty-thousand members of DPMA are very quotation is r—ecognition of the need for balance be- much "people-oriented," and not exclusively "techni- tween the two neither should be regarded as more cally-oriented." important than the other. As managers of data processing installations, DPMA It is this delicate balance that DPMA feels must be members have perhaps a greater opportunity to see, kept in the forefront. We agree with the President's on a day to day basis, some of the privacy and security statement that "it is becoming much easier for record- problems which are being discussed during this Con- keeping systems to affect people than for people to ference. DPMA members, being responsible for the affect record-keeping systems" and further endorse . . . implementation of whatever laws and/or regulations Mr. Nixon's action to seek ways to assure that people may eventually result from the rapidly increasing in- dominate the machines, rather than awakening some terest in protecting citizens' rights to privacy, are dedi- dark morning in an Orwelian world. cated to finding a workable solution. Again quoting from Mr. Nixon's February 23 ad- Individually and collectively, the members of the dress, he stated that "At no time in the past has our Data Processing Management Association are vitally Government known so much about so many of its interested, both as professionals and as individuals, in individual citizens. This new knowledge brings with assuring that the rights of privacy of all Americans it an awesome potential for harm as well as good are fully and permanently protected. There is concern, and an equally awesome responsibility on those who however, that in the post-Watergate mood oftoday, that have that knowledge." I would add that not only does there may be those who feel that their primary mission government know more about all of us than ever be- is to emasculate what they regard as the "monster- fore ... so now does thebusinessworld. computer." It is "the awesome responsibility" referred to by The end result of Conferences, likethis one, or future the President that most concerns DPMA. The equip- legislation and regulations, must be both practical and ment manufacturers will provide the hardware and w cro ir pk pa lb il ne g . bu. si. nes sa sfe agu na drd Gs ovw eh ri nc mh enw ti .ll Hp ar so tt ie fct y w di rt ah fo tu et d m tho edi cf oi me pd utar ec rhi ct ee nc tt eu rre . .to . op tr ho et re sct wit lh le fop ch uys si oca nl thd eat da esa in gd n procedures or laws based on fear of the "Big Brother" of "secure software" which will help reduce risk of s sey en kdr toom re ectw ii fl yl . surely be as onerous as the ill they u ten ra .u Bt uho tr li ez te ud su alt lil riz ea mt eio mn beo rf ti hn af tor itma it si to hn e uin serth we hc oom mp uu s- t implement the systems, comply with the safeguards, In my opinion, the Bagley Bill recently introduced and assure that all new requirements are being met. in the California State Assembly (as the "Computer Both as professional data processors and as citizens, C tyr pi eme ofPr "e ov ve en rkt ii lo ln "A wc et o hf op1 e97 c3 a" n), beis aa vn oie dx ea d.mp Wl he io lf et ih te s st oh ce iam te iom nbe wir ls l so uf ppt oh re tD aat poa siP tr io vc ee as ps pi rng oaM chan ta og te hm ee pn rt ivaAs c- y purpose is laudable, and many of its provisions are issue. Indeed, so will the thousands of members who highly desirable, one questions whether other require- make up the dozens of other computer-related organi- m ene tn it rs e po uf rpt ohe sepr ofop co os me pd utA ec rt uw tio lu il zd a, tioi nn . fact, defeat the hza ot wi eo vn es r,rep tr he atsen mt ee md bh ee rr se t oh fis am llor tn hi en sg e. gI rt ouis psi —mpe nr oa tti jv ue s, t As stated by the manager of a major California DPMA— get involved now in helping to draft and County Data Processing department, the bill would test the new procedures and operational concepts which "penalize organizations wishing to take advantage of will be required to make the result practical instead of the benefits of automation, thus discouraging the de- foolishly idealistic. sirable use of computers and depriving the public of In closing, I am happy to report that DPMA's gov- the cost savings to be realized from computerization." erning body will consider at its meeting next week, And, why should data stored in computers be sub- a newly drafted "Standards of Ethical Professional jected to restrictive regulations not also applied to Practice Regarding Individuals' Rights of Privacy." records stored in manual systems? Shouldn't "obsolete Recognizing that codes of practice are merely words data" be purged from file cabinets, too? on paper unless adhered to, we feel nonetheless that In his statement on The American Right to Privacy, this one small step is better than none at all. These President Nixon quoted from the Federalist Papers standards were drafted by Mr. Robert Marrigan. CDP, 25DPMA International Vice President for Government Granted, these are but words on paper and in Relations, who is attending this Conference. I would fact, have not yet been adopted. We hope. ,. h. owever, like to share these standards with all of you: that they can be considered as a sort of Hippocratic The members of the Data Processing Management Oath for Professional Data Processors who recognize Association, recognize their responsibility to: their obligation to protect the citizens of this nation. 1. Continuously strive to honor the rights to privacy We obviously see the need for stronger more effective rules, laws and procedures, but hope that a balance of all individuals by using the information pro- vided for their use only in the manner for which will be maintained to assure what many have c—alled it was obtained and intended; t ch oe mpugr te ea rt—est wilb lus ni on tes bs e rd ee dv ue cl eo dpm te ont pilo ef s oa fll rut bi bm le e, ut nh -e 2. Uphold the responsibility of trust, implicit with able to help because it's been rendered powerless to their professional status, by maintaining the con- harm. fidentiality of data entrusted to their care; To quote another American President . . . "Come, let us reason together" and let computer users,technicians, 3. tA ov fo ui rd thu es ri tn hg eii rnf oo wr nma pt ei ro sn ono af la inc to en rf ei sd te sn ;tial nature g do ov we nrnm cae ln mt lyage an nci des, cutand a c pit ai tz hen tr he rp or ue gs hent ta ht eive ls ooal ml insi gt 4. Attempt to remove any misleading or inaccurate morass of laws and regulations which could harm as data associated with any individual, immediately well as help. upon learning that its current status is in error. A SYSTEMATIC APPROACH TO DATA SECURITY R. L. Thomas and Robert H. Courtney IBM Corporation, Old Orchard Road, Armonk, New York 10504 Mr. Thomas wrong for the industry to wait until that demand This meeting and the conferencelast November focus becomes pressing before taking the necessary steps to upon the need to bring additional understanding to the meet the problem. complex issues of privacy, confidentiality, and security, As many of you know, at the 1972 Spring Joint particularly as they relate to computer systems. Bob Computer Conference, T. Vincent Learson, then Chair- Courtney, the next speaker, and I appreciate this op- man of the IBM Board committed IBM to a significant portunity to discuss some of the areas in which IBM investment in the study of the requirements of data is active to help in the resolution of these problems. security and for further development of appropriate As a manufacturer of computer systems we recog- safeguards for IBM products. For example, the crypto- nize our responsibility to assist our customers in graphic techniques included in the cash issuing termi- achieving the data security they require. To offer sys- nals of our recently announced finance communica- tems, products, services and counsel that clearly con- tions system. tribute to the solution of data security problems. Another part of that investment has gone into a Our earliest activities in the security area were two-year joint study begun in 1972 with MIT, the prompted, frankly, more by our customers' need to State of Illinois and TRW; each giving special em- secure certain business information than "privacy" phasis to a particular aspect of data security. We plan motivations. Historically, customers have expressed a to publish the results of these study site efforts by the strong desire for broader and easier access to systems, spring of this year. We do not expect significant tech- and a relatively low level of demand for data security. nological breakthroughs; however, the results evalu- Today the demand is somewhat greaterand a variety of ate several key factors in data security protection and security techniques and capabilities are available to identify requirements for secure systems. Further, they provide a level of security commensurate with the risk- confirm the belief, that an effective security system cost trade-olTs most desire. But the demand from cus- must include the total environment: physical and pro- tomers for computer security features still ranks below cedural safeguards as well as those provided by hard- other considerations such as price, performance and ware and software. Results are based upon actual ex- other special capabilities. perience with the Resource Security System and include It is our feeling the awareness and identification of observations and recommendations relative to identi- the needs of security will increase in the future, and fication, authorization, journaling and programming demand for product features and systems solutions will system integrity. The understanding gained on data grow considerably. And although certain tools and security as a result of this work will be placed in the techniques are available today, we feel it would be public domain. While only some of the pressing data 26: security questions are answered, we believe the results mated data processing has heightened this conflict and will be of assistance to the entire data processing posed serious questions about precautions required to community. protect individual privacy, it is also true the computer Through our marketing organization we have devel- can be a key factor in achieving desired implementa- oped a data security awareness program. It is designed tion of privacy principles when they are defined and to make computer users aware of potential exposures agreed upon. and alternatives to address them. Briefings and discus- Second, proper focus and attention of many parties sions have already been held with many companies, must be brought to bear on the problems of privacy and industry groups, and earlier this year we increased so as to strike a balance between the need for privacy our capability to reach even more organizations. One versus the legitimate need for information, and this part of this program includes the publication of bro- must include a clear consideration of the costs involved. chures on several aspects of data security. Another Third, any consensus concerning privacy principles part was a series of data security symposia where at- or information practices must include input from cus- tendees submitted papers on their data security needs todians of information systems. And once arrived at, and experiences. Thirteen government agencies par- these principles and practices can provide meaningful ticipated to date. One symposium was specifically de- guidelines for the development and application of the signed to interchange information and requirements technology. on this vital subject with members of the auditing Fourth, we believe information practices as they re- community. late to personal information must inherently embrace But much more needs to be done. This is particu- manual as well as automated record keeping systems, larly true in light of the increased attention being giv- because sensitive information also exists in manual en to the issue of "privacy." files. I believe there is general agreement that technology Fifth, if it is determined legislation is necessary, alone cannot assure desired levels of privacy. But data the legislation should focus upon principles and infor- security can obviously assist in assuring privacy and mation practices relating to personal data, and should technological advances can improve control and reduce attempt to resolve the major issues of interpretation the threat of improper disclosure of personal or confi- as they may arise in practice. [I might add, the first dential data. step from a legislative viewpoint ought to be a deter- In this regard, IBM is pursuing programs to im- mination of what information should be collected, by prove the data security capability of currently avail- whom and to whom it may be made available.] In any able products, particularly for complex systems en- event, any legislation enacted should leave ample room vironments. For example, we have placed considerable for the innovation of both computer users and manu- emphasis on the integrity of our 0S/VS2 Release 2 facturers to provide alternative security means to System Control Program. And we have made data se- achieve the intent of the law makers. Otherwise, we all curity a basic design criterion for future systems and run the risk of having "secure" systems which do not products, and as we gain a clearer understanding of in fact assure privacy, plus the risk of stifling the evo- evolving data security needs in the marketplace, we lution of technology. expect to be responsive to them. Finally, we support Dr. Ruth Davis' comments con- I would like to make a few brief comments at this cerning the need for a national coherence among laws point concerning privacy. Fundamentally, the privacy defining the privacy rights of individuals and the basic issue is not technological, and it cannot be solved by information practices to be followed in protecting these technological solutions alone or computer manufactur- rights. ers alone. If society is to guard against the misuse of In summary, the privacy issue must be dealt with information about people, there must be sound public through sound public policies which: reflect a balance policies. The responsibility to shape prudent public between the need for freedom of information and need policies must be shared by legislators, government for privacy, result from the concensus of all affected agencies, computer users in government and industry, parties, cover both manual and automated systems, and computer manufacturers and private citizens. which will provide for a uniform approach in imple- I believe that portion of the summary of the Novem- mentation. ber 1973 NBS Conference dealing with privacy very Concerning data security, we are not without tools well covers the observations made at the conference and procedures to address t—oday's problems. But we and does much to clarify a complex and often times must anticipate future needs and we are working to emotional subject. provide better solutions to those problems. Bob Court- In my view, some of the observations and others ney, of our Systems Development Division, has been deserve emphasis and consideration involved in our data security activities for six years First, there has long been an inherent conflict be- and is known to many of you. He will discuss a sys- tween the interests and rights of an individual and tematic approach to data security. those of government and private institutions as they relate to the protection of confidentiality of data as Mr. Courtney opposed to the desire for greater freedom of informa- Among the many mistakes which I have made in this tion in support of expanded services and programs at particular job one of the most embarrassing, when all levels. Although it is true the introduction of auto- reviewed a few years later, was the early assumption 27that the implementors of data processing systems would ative weighting of each of these on a scale of concerns find it rather easy to satisfy their data security prob- will vary widely not only between EDP facilities, but lems if the vendors simply made available to them a usualy from file to file within a facility as well. So comprehensive array of security measures in the hard- then must the appropriateness of specific security mea- ware and software products. The installation manage- sures vary as a function of both their effectiveness in ment could then shop among these items, cafeteria containing any specific concern and their cost in terms style, picking those things which seemed appropriate of performance burden or dollars. and rejecting others to the satisfaction of their partic- If the foregoing proposition can be accepted, then ular needs. Indeed, we have recognized the provision it follows that a comprehensive problem statement of these security measures to be a responsibility of should precede the selection of any security measures. the vendors, but the availability of these security func- Even partial problem statements followed by piecemeal tions or features in the products, while often neces- selection of security measures are very risky because sary to the attainment of an adequate degree of secur- in this mode we are trapped into selecting measures ity, are not in themselves sufficient. which contain the partially defined problem but which As we began several years ago to examine the se- may well not be broad enough in scope to contain other curity concerns and requirements of data processing aspects of the problem as it may be stated once all installations, it became quite apparent that before se- aspects of it are fully developed. Thus piecemeal prob- curity measures in hardware and software could be lem definition and piecemeal selection of solutions will effective, much additional work was also required in probably crate layering or overlapping security func- the areas of physical security and operating procedures. tions with the result that, in the end, security is But perhaps even more importantly, if possible, was achieved only at costs which are unnecessarily high. the need for a rational, systematic approach to the For this reason it is my suggestion that comprehensive identification of appropriate data security concerns, to problem definition must logically precede the selection the conduct of a workable risk assessment leading to of security measures, whether these be hardware; soft- quantitatively expressed statements of the risk involved ware or the still somewhat more familiar physical se- and the impact on the organizations or enterprises de- curity measures. pendent on the security of the data, and, finally, to the As an example, let's consider a not very hypothetical selection of security measures appropriate to these now- situation in which we decide that we would like to defined problems and their quantitatively expressed have our back-up tapes protected in the event of an magnitude. overwhelming disaster of some type, including nuclear It is the purpose of this presentation to describe for attack. Such decisions are commonly made without you a structured, systematic approach to the determi- much regard for the current probability of occurrence nation of data security requirements and to their satis- of such events. Later in some subsequent iteration of faction. It is my hope that in some small way this our piecemeal problem definition we find that we must proposed methodology will contribute to a better un- also have availability or back-up files to recover from dersanding of the problems we are addressing here mistakes in the data processing operation which result and permit easier communications between us as we in the destruction of the local working data set. We seek accptable solutions. need the back-up files for recovery but we have stored Communications among scientists and engineers en- them hours away by motor vehicle in an abandoned gaged in the pursuit of some common goal are fre- sale mine. It is probable that our data is seldom in quently, if not generally, characterized by strong dif- greater jeopardy than when being transported on the ferences of opinion as to how problems might best be public highways. Thus by not examining all of our solved and the goal achieved. The pursuit of data se- needs for data for recoverability we have probably curity is no exception. In the case of data security, satisfied our requirements for recovery from low-prob- however, I suggest that the widely diverse opinions ability catastrophic events but have greatly hampered are more properly attributable to differences of opinion our ability to recover from more mundane but higher as to the effectiveness or applicability of specific securi- probability catastrophes. 'v measures to any given problem. A discussion of the A convenient place to start our systematic approach effectiveness of any particular security measure can to problem definition is by first listing some of the only follow a statement of the problem to which it is principal reasons why we should be concerned for the to be applied. The cat was right when it told Alice safety of our data. This list should then be borne in that it made little difference which path she took if mind as we proceed through a threat analysis and risk she didn't know where she wanted to go. assessment and to the selection of appropriate security It is difficult to find two data processing systems measures. whose security needs can be effectively and economic- I believe that the following six motives for security ally satisfied by the same set of security measures. are appropriate to practically all data processing appli- There is then no single data security problem. The dif- cations. ferences are both in kind and in degree. 1. The near-total dependence of most organizations Data Security refers to the safety of data from all using EDP on the continued availability of the of the unfortunate things which can happen to it: that system and data. Very rarely do we have the al- is, safety from accidental or intentional, but unauthor- ternative of going back to a manual mode of ized, modification, destruction, or disclosure. The rel- operation. 282. Data is a major asset. It is acquired at significant ganization. These same data also show that employees cost, it is needed to conduct the business of the tend to use dishonestly those data and system functions organization, and it must be replaced at signifi- which they have been authorized to use in order to cant cost if lost. In these respects it doesn't differ perform their jobs. In general, dishonest people work- materially from other assets which must be pro- ing in accounts payable manipulate accounts payable tected. and inventory control clerks manipulate, to their own advantage, inventory files. Inventory control clerks do 3. The need to protect private or proprietary infor- not manipulate payroll and payroll clerks do not modi- mation from disclosure to those who should not fy accounts payable files. People tend to use dishonestly have it. those capabilities which they have been given and 4. In implementing many of today's systems we with which they have developed detailed familiarity worked quite hard in making the systems as easy and, apparently, contempt. They are not inclined to as possible to use and in extending the services cross functional barriers within the organization. They of the system to all of those who could properly perceive less risk of detection w'ithin, rather than be- u ens te lyit. pU rn of vo ir dt eu dnat ne el wy, ow pe pora tt unt ii tm ie es squ fi ot re di in sa hd ov ne er st- t yon Td h, irt dhe oi nr oa up rpo pi rn it oe rid tydo lim stai in ss f. ire. A fire does not have people to misuse the system or data. Thus our to be in the machine room to completely cripple the concerns for security must extend to lessening data processing operation. Fire which denies the data the probability of financial reward to dishonest processing system power, or air conditioning or even people. access to preprinted paper forms on which the system is dependent can be completely crippling. It is appar- 5. This item is in some ways a corrolary of the one ently easy to forget this. ^hen planning fire detection immediately preceding it. Fair personnel prac- and fire quenching systems for the EDP room we rath- tices require that we be able to fix responsibility er frequently forget that we need a similar capability for dishonest activities so as to remove from in the areas immediately adjacent to it, which quite suspicion all honest people who share in the pro- often have larger quantities of combustibles in them gramming, maintenance, operation, and use of the than do the machine rooms themselves. The last fire data processing facility. Thus we must have the we had start in a computer was a Model 650 in 1957. ability to identify the dishonest people so as to Thus, this is not a high-probability source of fire. The remove all other users from suspecion. last operation which was crippled by fire starting else- 6. The management of an installation must be in a where was much more recent. position of demonstrating to more senior manage- Fourth on the priority list is disgruntled employees. ment that it has, in fact, been a responsible stew- The amount of damage done in this way, is relatively ard of the resources entrusted to it, that reason- email, but the per incident impact is sufficiently large able things have been done to protect against to warrant concern. Problems in this area which have reasonably anticipatable problems. resulted in significant dollar loss seem for the most part to have either been easily avoidable with accepted When considering the data security issue we all management practices or resulted in greater loss than have a very human tendency to postulate technologi- necessary becaus problems continued far too long as cally elegant and dramatic means of intrusions into the a result of insensitivity to pain on the part of the in- data processing systems. We tend to resist consideration stallation management. of the mundane and unexciting if for no other reason Fifth, we have damage from water. Floods and than it appears to afford little intellectual challenge. natural disasters are of course a problem but I sug- However, I propose to you that the solution to the mun- gest that stockholders, depositors, policy holders and dane problems is more intellectually challenging than voters are much more tolerant oflossesto major natural are the solutions to the more dramatic situations. Now catastrophes than they are to readily avoidable losses to proceed in an orderly fashion through our look at due to a leak in the roof or defective plumbing on security requirements. I propose that we next take an floors above. A significant percentage of the losses due utterly pragmatic look at the security problems we to water are readily avoidable with a modest invest- actually encounter. ment in a roll of polyethylene film and a pair of scis- If we list in order of decreasing probability, that is sors. This modest investment, in the order of S15. can most probable first, the unfortunate things which hap- avoid major water loss. pen to systems and data, we find at the top of the Finally, in last place, accounting for a very small list, leading all other items by a very significant mar- percentage of the losses, but notto be ignored of course, gin, the all-too-familiar problem of errors and omis- is the loss due to "others." These are the losses attrib- sions. utable to people who have no current or immediate Dishonest employees are send on our list. It is im- past involvement with the system, who are in effect portant to note that most of the data available today strangers penetrating our systems. IMr. Robert Abbott on fraud and embezzlement involving data processing of the Lawrence Radiation Laboraton,- noted in his talk systems reveal that there are very few instances of at the 1973 session on Controlled Accessibility at XBS significant loss in which an employee was not involved that he had been unable to identify significant losses either alone or in collusion with others outside the or- due to technologically complex intrusions into data 29processing systems. Our findings fully support his. We All schemes for the identification of people to the have seen attempts and we have seen minor losses but data processing system fall into three basic classes. we have also seen numerous instances in which at- We can use something you know, such as a password; tempts were made primarily bcause of the intrinsically somethingyou are such as a voice print or finger print; interesting technical challenge but during which the or something you have, such as a badge or credit card. intruders either would not or could not exercise their Of the three basic means for identifying people the intrusion in such a way as to do significant damage. one which has been used most for identifying people In prioritizing the probable exposures of any data remote from the system at terminals has been some- processing installation to loss of data security there is thing you know, such as a password. Passwords are a very natural, human tendency to consider things inexpensive to use but passwords are also very weak. which might happen but which have never been known People have a strong inclination to give the password to happen, which have a low probability of occurrence to anyone with whom they work who can help them do and the avoidance of which might impose considerable their job as a consequence of having that password. cost or inconvenience on the data processing facility. The security of the password scheme is difficult to We can always imagine a much wider array of mali- audit because people who have just given away their cious activities on the part of people than we can password or people who have received it look no dif- reasonably anticipate happening. Rarely will we be able ferent as a consequence of having done either. At- to afford to protect ourselves against everything which tempts to improve on passwords through the so-called might happen. We must reserve our concerns for those extended handshaking, that is through the use of ques- things which happen with a sufficiently high prob- tions which presumably only the right person knows ability to justify corrective measures including, where the answer to, have only occasionally been successful appropriate, recovery rather than avoidance. Hypo- and then only in applications where the sessions are chondria is itself an illness. long and not too numerous. Then, only, does the time The next step in our examination of our security spent in discussing identification with the system not needs, after threat analysis, is risk assessment. A de- constitute a significant performance burden. tailed explanation of the approach which we have de- Another class of schemes for identifying people is veloped is well beyond the scope of this presentation. to examine the completely personal parameters which However it involves an examination of each of our are unique to the individual. This of course has been important data aggregations in the light of the six bad the way in which we have classically recognized people things which can happen to these data, so as to deter- all of our lives, that is by looking at them and seeing mine the possible dollar impact of each thing happen- who they are. Personal recognition, including the use ing to those data and a gross assessment of the prob- of picture badges is of course a frequently acceptable ability of occurrence so as to arrive at a statement of way of identifying people who are bringing work to risk in cost per unit time, such as dollars per year. the window of a batch shop. Its principal failing is not I will be glad to discuss this technique at some later in the identification area but in the failure of the per- time with anyone who is interested. son receiving the work to check the authorization of This leads us to a discussion of the selection of spe- the recognized individual to do what he has asked to cific security measures. Before going further into this do, to run the job submitted. though, there is a point which I would like to make The use of personal parameters for the identification with some emphasis; that is, that in putting security of people at remote terminals provides some interest- measures in our hardware and software we have not ing challenges. Fingerprints occur almost automatically attempted, or even thought it advisable, to introduce to anyone who considers this problem. Our current security measures now which may be needed in the assessment is that, while fingerprints have great value future but for which no significant number of people in verification of personal identification in the law en- have current need. Our efforts have been to introduce forcement environment, they do not appear to be well- security measures appropriate to the needs of the time suited as a low cost means of identifying terminal op- frame in which the particular product will exist. There erators to a system. The cost of reading in the finger- is no more justification for unwanted or unneeded print, the amount of data which must be transmitted security measures than there is for unneeded functional to the device which does the identification and the attributes of any other kind. need for rotation and translation of these data before Security measures fall into four distinct categories. interpretation all appear to make the technique eco- These are identification, authorization, audit, and sys- nomically, if not technically, infeasible in the near fu- tem integrity. ture. Speaker verification through analysis of pre-stored If we wish to selectively constrain people to doing voice patterns is technically feasible but contributes only those things we want them to do and deny them significant technical problems in practicable imple- the opportunity to do things we do not want them to mentations. Noise on common-carrier lines, variation do, then we must be able to uniquely identify these in microphones and the need to transmit voice and people. Similarly, we cannot hold people individually digital data over the same lines and segregate them accountable for actions they have taken on the system on the receiving end all serve to significantly compli- unless we can compile a journal in which the individ- cate the use of this technology for operator identifica- uals are uniquely identified and associated with these tion. We did conduct a rather extensive test of this actions. technology on several dozen terminals at our Advanced 30Administrative System (AAS) and then discontinued become known. Although much of the data within that its use because of these complications. We have other system is sensitive and of great importance to the technologies in this category which we are currently successful operation of our business, we believe our pursuing but with no strong indication of their prob- data to be far more than adequately safe and that we ability of success at this point. are completely justified in our continued dependence In the last category of identification schemes is on its security there. something you have, that is the badge or credit card. The previous speaker, Mr. Thomas, referred to the In recent years we have introduced magnetic stripe Joint Study activities and the planned publication of credit card readers on some terminals on which their the results of these studies. Included in the work done use appears appropriate. This seems a solid, readily at the Joint Study sites was a detailed examination of workable technique for identifying the operators of the requirements for authorization in future systems. those terminals to the central system. Added security You should find the description of that work interest- can be achieved through use of these magnetic stripe ing and informative when it becomes available. credit cards in conjunction with a password or em- The fourth category into which we classify our se- ployee n —umber or name if these are not embossed on curity measures is system integrity. This includes the the card and they should not be. proper functioning of hardware, programs, appropriate There is a need to avoid loss of private or proprie- physical security and operating procedures and the re- tary information through inadvertent transposition of quired degree of safety against eavesdropping and terminals during transactions. To this end, we have wiretapping. After several years ofreviewing functional built into all of our newer terminals, which may be objectives for new products, the functional specifica- connected to a system through the switched network, tions and actual designs, I have been forced, quite re- factory-assigned, hardware-generated terminal identi' luctantly, to the conclusion that, while general guide- fication characters. In addition, we have added to oui lines for the design of hardware to eliminate potential transmission control units appropriate circuitry to per- data security problems. The number of ways in which mit program sensing of lossof continuity of connection people can inadvertently introduce data security prob- so as to indicate the need to check the identification lems exceeds by far the ability of any author of a de- of the terminal before transmitting data to it. sign guide to conceive priori all of the ways in which In some applications it may be desired to check the such problems might occur. Thus we have found it de- authorization of the terminal, as well as its operator, sirable to maintain the function of critically evaluating to access the data or perform the transaction solicited each new product for potential data security problems from the terminal. The hardware-generated characters so that we can correct that design prior to completion can also be used for this function. In general, however, of the development process. As a result of this activity terminal identification hardware has its greatest value we have specificaly modified the design of numerous in preventing inadvertent loss of data. It is not overly devices to improve the safety of data as it might be difficult to build an imposter terminal so this technique affected by that device. does not lend itself to protection against technically Many of you are aware of our announcement ofOS/ competent, malicious people who would intrude through VS2 Release 2 as our high-integrity system control impostor terminals. It is certainly no substitute for program. For reasons which everyone here, I am sure, good operator identification techniques. appreciates, we did not announce this as a "secure" We have previously defined authorization and audit control program. We did announce that we had cor- as primarily the functions of constraining people to rected all integrity deficiencies which we have been those things we want them to do and to keeping a rec- able to identify and committed to the correction of ord of what they, in fact, did. Somewhat earlier we any others which are identified for us. An extensive also noted that people seem little inclined to attempt in- effort was made to identify all potential deficiencies trusions into portions of the system to which they are and, as a result, we believe that if any remain they not normally authorized access. If, however, it is pos- will be difficult for an intruder to exercise. We hope sible to increase the difficulty with which they can do that will be the case. this, and at a cost commensurate with its value, then I will not speak further to the requirement for physi- it should of course be done. However, of the two func- cal security and operating procedures. tions, authorization and audit, the journalling of what In the matter of eavesdropping; that is, intercept- people have done is usually, if not always, more impor- ing emanations from the system, it appears now tech- tant to the achievement of security. nically infeasible for eavesdroppers to acquire infor- We have extensive experience in the application of mation from a CPU of more than very modest size and both authorization and extensive journalling in our its immediately attached peripheral devices. For this own internal Advanced Administrative System. Each reason, and because of their extreme cost, we have system user is quite effectively constrained to only seen a steady decline in the use of screen rooms about those functions which we wish him to perform and to centralized data processing facilities. only those data which he needs to perform those func- There is reason for concern for the susceptibility tions. In addition, we do extensive journalling so that of terminals, including any small, remotely-located, se- we can extend to our 7000 authorized users on 1400 rial-by-bit devices for the loss of information to an terminals the assurance that, if they do what they have eavesdropper. We have no indication whatever of any been told not to, there is a high probability that it will loss of data in this manner. However, if it is known or 31— believed that the data in the system is of very high paper quite interesting and far more understandable value to others, then a degree of concern is justified. than any dissertation I might offer on that subject here It can be shown that the cost of intercept to the in- today. truder as a function of his distance from the device I am certain that we can agree that the only gener- is generally a very steep curve. His costs increase dra- ally applicable solution to a wiretapping problem is matically as he is forced away from the emanating to encode the data in transmission. To that end we device through control of the immediate surroundings. developed algorithms which we believe to be peculiarly It is our belief, based on rather extensive experience useful in the data processing environment. We have in this area, that it is economically infeasible to at- started introducing cryptography in those products tempt to build devices which have such a low level of which, by their nature, invite wiretapping. Again, we emanation that no further concern for the eavesdrop- are not aware of any loss of data from any EDP sys- per is any way justified. The cost of this low emanation tem through wiretapping. We can anticipate problems characteristic heavily impacts the cost of the device. in this area when other ways of achieving the same As an alternative we have decided to evaluate each results are not available and when wiretapping be- new device offering a potential for this problem so as comes the most feasible means of achieving the results to determine the probable cost/distance relationships and the rewards are sufficiently great to justify it. We to be encountered by the eavesdropper so that we can believe this to be the case with on-line cash issuing offer our customers guidance in the selection and place- terminals. For this reason we introduced the first large ment of terminals and in determining the amount of scale use of cryptography in the data processing busi- geography over which they should maintain surveil- ness with the 2984 and 3614 Cash Issuing Terminals lance to make improbable the loss of data in this man- in which communication between the cash issuing ter- ner. If anyone has a concern in this area, we will be minals and the host CPU is encrypted. glad to discuss it with him and offer appropriate guid- This brings me to the end of this discussion of one ance. possible approach to a better understanding of the data Now to the last item in our system integrity list security problems. As we work to enhance both our un- cryptography. We will not discuss here the particular derstanding of the problem and our ability to control algorithms which we have developed. I would however, any problems which exist in the data security area, I refer you to the lead article in the May 1973 Scientific am quite certain that you share with me, as profession- American for a highly readable dissertation on that als in an exciting business, an intense desire that our subject by Mr. Horst Feistel of our Research facility increasingly powerful systems be powerfully used and in Yorktown. N.Y. I am certain you will find that not powerfully misused. SECURITY IN COMPUTER NETWORKS Peter S. Browne General Electric Information Services Business Division 7735 Old Georgetown Road, Bethesda, Maryland 20014 It is clear that we are now entering into an era of The winners, of course, have to be the users of distributed computing via networks. The highly suc- computing power. It will be possible to hook into a cessful concepts which were pioneered by the Ad- network at any time; to process against remote data vanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) network bases; to tie in-house computers to those of foreign and the General Electric Time-Sharing Network have governments or companies; to query remote subsets of now become very well known. These concepts contem- operations; to feed data to other remote points. Yet plate batch or interactive processing, accomplished re- networking will allow, and even encourage the use of motely with output being distributed to perhaps other "local" computing power to do those things that are locations. The data base may well reside in several purely local in nature. The development of networking places. As you know, such systems are very complex, technology, with a consequent rapid growth in on-line requiring an immense amount of processing logic just applications, expanded the role of computers well be- to handle the message protocol. yond the simple functions they were initially assigned. Also, 1974 is the year of revolution for computer It is very easy to get enthusiastic about the possibili- communications. The specialized common carriers are ties of net working and remote computing. The effect now getting their systems in full operation. Datran and is the same whether the network is a "star" type such MCI are realities. Two new entries in the market place. as GE's with centralized processing capability at one Packet Communications, Inc. and Telenet are causing end of a world-wide communications network, or the quite a stir. Therefore, the continuing trend toward "topological" type, in which processing is accomplished marriage of the computer industry and the communi- at the various nodes. Costs are going down, and use is cations industry is inevitable. expanding almost exponentially. 32While it may have been possible to remain compla- needs to know, will be interacting simultansously cent about security and privacy of data in the bye- with the system. This places a heavy burden on gone days of stand-alone, in-house dedicated systems the overall security mechanisms to control the and batch processing, today, institutions are putting in- spread of information, or its misrouting to the creasingly sensitive data into sysms that can be ac- wrong user. cessed from a host of geographically dispersed loca- tions. The November 1973 meetings here at NBS fo- 4. The complexity vulnerability has already been cused on the need to develop mechanisms for security mentioned. The more extensive the network, the and privacy in computer systems. One recurring theme greater the probability of system error and vul- was that today's systems aren't designed with security nerability to rational intrusion. in mind, and that technical solutions are yet to come. 5. Another problem also refers to size and scope. It This is only partially true on both counts. There is is virtually impossible to verify that any large no doubt that the needs for proper protection have not software system is completely free of errors and been sufficiently addressed by either manufacturers of anomalies. Also, the state of design is such that hardware or users of systems. It is also true that net- frequent changes to the system can be expected. working represents a greater threat to security than a Errors, compounded by frequent changes, can simpler type of dedicated system. However, I hope to cause frightful security problems when multiplied show you that an adequate level of security is possible, over a large network, in which there are multi- today. To achieve it requires far more attention to the tudes of large systems, all interconnected and subject than most people have been willing to give. We reliant on another large system (the interfacing will propose some possible safeguards and solutions to processors and communications protocol) to tie problems of security and privacy, and then devise some them all together. principles to consider when designing a system or sub- mitting a request for proposal. The obvious question is that with so much going against it, is there really any hope for adequate pro- Is Network Security Possible? tection in such systems? As we shall explore, there is some hope not only in the future, but even now, with The increased exposure to threats faced by on-line, today's systems. Much of the hope depends on what remote computer networking was covered very well the user or owner can do on his own. in the November NBS Conference. In essence, remote The first step toward achieving any kind of security entry allows a would-be intruder the mask of anonymi- in a resource shared system is to apply those principles ty, and communications lines themselves are vulnerable of protection that would be normally put in a local, to capture, passive infiltration or the problems of mis- batch, stand-alone system. If the basic principles of route, transmission error, etc. Jerry Hammett of Ohio physical and administrative security, as well as ade- summed up the conventional wisdom of the day when quate audit trails and backup are followed, then the he stated that "interactive processing threatens securi- necessary groundwork will have been laid for imple- ty." It is true that if one looks at the vulnerabilities of mentation of protection throughout the network. It is a dedicated, batch oriented system and compares a re- imperative, however, that each location submit to the mote access, time-shared, networked system, the differ- rudimentary standards of security. Such standards ence in exposure is probably that of one order of must be a top management concern, because nothing magnitude greater. The following list exemplifies the will defeat a security program faster than to have an additional leakage that accrues uniquely to remote independent and recalcitrant appendage off in the computing. boondocks thumbing his nose at all the controls float- ing down from above. 1. Physical access to the computer cannot be isolated There are many protective measures that surveyors to the environs of a machine room. Multitudes of of networks can install into their system software and users will be accessing the central system(s) from hardware, to help enhance the possibility of achieving all over the world. If dial-up lines are used, there security. The next section will explain some of the can be no assurance that the remote location will measures already existing in commercially available have any semblance of physical security. systems. 2. The communications lines themselves are vulner- Current knowledge about protection technology is able to tapping or passive monitoring of emana- already at a pretty sophisticated level. People like Bob t wi io tn hs i. nCr to hs est sa wl ik tcb he it nw gee cn entc ro am lm sun cai ncat pri eo sn es ntli anes vuo lr - A o Lfb ab rSo rDt yCt . Ro of bH eiL rla d tw ae eFr xaa u on fsc te Ao RR fa PNd Ai Sa At a,i no dBn u RtL ola geb r es r, La SC cml hpa er s lk lonW ofe oi f ts hX es Dm ASa i.n r nerability. Force know their way around the gut technical issues 3. Any secure system is based on the concept of iso- of the day. They know how to design secure operating lating any one individual from all elements of systems or secure computer/communication architec- the system to which he has no need for access. ture. The development cycle is already under way. At Normally, this is done by denying physical ac- least two major mainframe manufacturers have heavy cess to those without "clearance." In a networked commitments in system security design efforts. I firmly system, a large population of users with varying believe that within one to three years we will see com- 33mercially available secure systems that go a long way the network is "there," or whether they penetrate toward providing the kind of environment in which upon invitation by the network. The net result data can be kept totally private, even in a vast, re- of such penetration activity is usually to close source-sharing network. loopholes. Our own GE Time-Sharing Network Finally, there is some good rationale for making the has been under attack for many years. We have statement that networks can be inherently more secure hired a noted consultant to try and break its secu- than the more traditional kind of system. The reasons rity, and he has failed to do so, even though he are as follows: has been quite successful against a number of advanced DOD and Intelligence community "se- 1. Fewer people are actually handling data. Consider cure" systems. We have also never had to pay off the picture of a large batch system with the need on a $5,000 internal reward to GE employees. for a Job Control Language Facility, Input/Out- This is one network ssytem that is secure enough put section, job scheduling, submission of jobs to to hold the personal, private data of hundreds of the system by operators, collection of output and organizations, each of which has an in-house com- delivery to the customer. Then contrast this with puter system, but wouldn't entrust the most sensi- a job submitted through a remote terminal, with tive processing; thetruly competitive and proprie- its nature and purpose unknown by the network tary information, to its own data processing operators, who only hang tapes or disks with un- facility. obstrusive serial numbers and pass output to sta- tions, not people. Achieving Security in Network Systems — 2. It is easier to develop authorization schemes for Basic Physical and Data Security How can such a people from terminals, where what they know level of security be achieved? There is one necessary (passwords) or what they possess (identification condition. That is that the owners and users of the cards) can be used as the basis for system identi- network follow some simple, yet definitive guidelines fication and authorization rather than a job con- in regard to physical security, procedural security, trol card entry which is easily replaced or forged. backup and audit. These are necessary, but not suffi- The anonomity of a remote location can be used cient conditions for any computer system, but are espe- to good security advantage in that all jobs must cialy important given the increased vulnerabilities of go through a pre-defined authorization process resource sharing networks. before alowed to use the computer resources. Physical security standards should include very strict 3. The very protocol which is so necessary to even access control to the central elements of the network; the processing systems. Facilities should be protected allow packets of information to be transmitted computer to computer or remote terminal to com- from exposure to fire, flooding and natural elements, by means of construction, proper drainage, protected puter can serve as a security check. Additional location, fire/smoke detection, suppression equipment, authorization or identification checks can be built into the software. In addition, most networks etc. The systems should be protected against utility unreliability by power source backup, uninterruptible utilize remote concentrators or interface message processors which have processing and memory power systems (UPS) and redundant air conditioning equipment. Good housekeeping should be not only re- capability. These offer a powerful tool to aid the quired, but demanded. processing, checking and auditing of security re- Procedural protection can take many forms, to in- lated information. clude the mechanics of how access is granted. In fact, 4. Many existing networks, contrary to popular be- this is one of the least understood and underestimated lief, were designed from the beginning with secu- costs of security. In order to make protection work, rity in mind. Their existence would have been detialed attention needs to be given to maintenance of very fragile any other way. Many service firms system access rosters, followup of security incidents, are not selling hardware; they are selling simul- self-inspections, updating of security policy and proce- taneous and multiple access to central systems. dures and training in security procedures. In every And they would not stay in business very long if organization I know of, this is a full time job, yet very they couldn't protect the privacy and integrity of rarely is it handled by a full time person. Most security their customer's files and programs. There is a breaks down at this level; there is no one to handle second reason for attention to security needs. Not the responsibility, and things don't get done. Every only does the multiplicity of their customers make computer needs a Systems Security Officer, and the data security necessary, but they also make it higher he is in the organization, the better. possible. A broad customer base allows the heavy The need to provide backup for systems, devices and investment in security programs and procedures data is self evident. As important as the backup itself that are that necessary first step. is the set of procedures or rules to utilize it. Complex disaster recovery plans will do no good, if on the eve- 5. By their very nature, computer networks are tar- ning of a real catastrophe, the plan is locked in desk gets for penetrators, whether they be actually drawer in the middle of the fire with no one to remem- intent on damage, whether they penetrate because; ber what it was afl about. 342 The ideal security situation is to have all data move- Passwords or lockwords should be assignable at least ment recorded. This is impossible with today's hard- to the file level. In addition, authority for other users ware/software, so the next best step is to consider the to access, read, write or execute private files must be needs for audit trails throughout the organization. At- expressly granted, otherwise, data is not readable by tention to the basic principles of separation of duties other than the "owner." and accountability for actions will at least lead to Certain groups or "cliques" should be able to further possibilities of system auditability. Much of the com- restrict access by controlling the granting of passwords puter abuse that Donn Parker talks about could be and privileges, without the knowledge of systems per- avoided with even simple, rudimentary attention to sonnel. This ability should also extend to further con- audit details such as internal controls for validity strain any individual by restricting the precise pro- checks, error handling procedures, control totals, ac- grams, data files and sy.stem capabilities to which he counting for computer time and spot verification of may have access. computer output. The internal auditor needs to play a The adequately secured network will provide for data large role in the data processing part of the agency or encryption, at least at the file level. This ensures that business. He should not only evaluate existing controls, data as it resides in system files, on tape or on disc but should recommend new ones and should be con- is secure against capture at that level. sulted in the design phase of any programming project. The crucial issue in networking is the capability to All of these points are brought out very forcibly in encrypt data for transmission. It is a welcome sight to thenew NBS publication "Guidelines for Physical Secu- see the technology for encryption now entering the rity of Automatic Data Processing Facilities." It is public domain. The advent of specialized hardware highly recommended. It will help any agency provide cryptographic units to interface between computers and that necessary first step in achieving system secu—rity. terminals or other computers has been long needed. Systems Security (Controlled Accesssability) True Their cost is presently high, but their use is growing. network security can only be achieved today through Fortunately, there is hope that relatively inexpensive modifications to systems software and/or hardware. cryptographic transformations can be affected by As mentioned by other speakers, today's commercial modifications to terminals. systems don't have the necessary modifications. There The final issue in network security is that of the trans- are some systems, however, that are achieving an ade- mitted packets or messages. In a star system, in which quate level of security. Notable is the GE Network, as remote concentrators are used to collect, enhance and well as efforts by the Air Force to develop a truly forward messages, the issue is simpler than in a distrib- certificable versions of the Multics System. Intelligence uted network, with a greater variety of routing and dis- processing networks have achieved better security than tribution choices. In either case the requirements are many non-DOD systems need. The principles of design similar; to put enough routing, control and authoriza- that distinguish these networks from the more mun- tion information in the message protocol so that the dane variety have been or will be covered by other interfacing hardware can make appropriate decisions. speakers in this conference. A review of some basic These decisions should be as much a partof the line dis- principles would be in order, however. cipline as the decisions regarding acknowledgement/no First of all, access to the system must be rigidly con- acknowledgement, vertical or horizontal redundancy trolled and enforced. This implies that the identification checks and other message switching requirements. mechanism be one in which ambiguity is minimized The main points to make in regard to these measures and which can account for impersonations. Authentica- are twofold. First of all, all the measures mentioned tion words or techniques must be protected at the high- are available now, without having to wait for an un- est system level and must be changed regularly. Ideally, certain implementation. Secondly, though implementa- passwords should be random and non-mnemonic. Pass- tion of all of them may not be possible, depending on words and authetication information should be stored the particular network in question, enough can be im- in protected storage, not accessible through the termi- plemented to produce a worthwhile amount of security. nal. The terminal should be a part of the access mecha- It is important to emphasize that implementation of nism, so that certain data/programming can be re- the complete set or a viable sub-set will not produce the stricted from certain terminals. perfectly secure computer network that can now magi- Secondly, each user and process must be isolated cally begin to process the most sensitive and private from all other programs in the system. Hardware data in the world. That Utopia (or hell) probably will boundary registers, software address traps and various never come. There is no such thing as 100^:^- security. system statesshould be present. With efforts currently under way, it may be possible Assembly language programming should be abso- to measure that less than lOO^c and derive some useful lutely prohibited. All requests for data access should quantification of what a system will protect against, pass through a systems routine which mediates address and at what level. That is what we are all striving for. requests and passes them to the supervisor as a call. Therefore, to take a doomsday approach and claim This is where the inherent security of Multics or VS— that security is impossible to attain is as short sighted achieves high marks for security. In addition, core and as to ignore the very real problems of network vulner- peripheral shortage should be purged or zeroed out so ability. Good security is possible, today. But there are that there is no danger of another program or user some very important conditions, most of them uivolv- reading the residue. ing human and sociological issues, not technical ones. 35. : Prescription 2. Security objects such as individuals, terminals, programs, and data must be explicitly identified The custodians of data banks and the owners of data, to the system. For individuals, the following ap- as well as users and subjects, should have a large voice proaches may be used in determining what safeguards are present. This ses- — sion, and the previous one last Novemberaddressed the a. Passwords and/or account numbers. question of legislation. As a concerned professional b. Credit cards, badges, magnetically inscribed and private citizen, I welcome legislation in this area. objects. Dr. Willis Ware's report to the Secretary. Health, Edu- cation and W^elfare presented a reasoned exposition c. Identification based on personal characteris- of legislative needs. Beyond this step, I believe there tics such as voiceprint or fingerprints. are two very important actions that need to be ad- dressed by you, me and other concerned people on a Further authentification may be made by use of national basis. If action is started now, we should go passwords or challenge and reply procedures. If a long way toward insuring that systems are designed passwords are used, they should: with security in mind and that they are capable of safeguardmg individual and corporate rights of con- a. Be randomly generated and of sufficient fidentiality that are so urgently needed. — length to avoid compromise. Management and Operating Guidelines Every data b. Be changed periodically, preferably every processing/data communications environment is suffi- time used. ciently different in scope, breath, purpose and size so c. Be protected at least in accordance with the as to make rigid rules of security very difficult to en- level of data they safeguard. force. However, there are sufficient guidelines and practices that have stood the test of time. Some com- mon standards of physical, procedural, backup and The access control system should be sufficiently audit security can be maintained. Therefore, the first flexible to support a variety of constraints and step would seem to publish and use guidelines for secu- mixes of objects. Users could be checked against rity, and then audit their application. NBS is bringing terminals, programs, or data. An access list could out such guidelines very soon. They are not written or be attached to any or all of the above depending intended to be rigid expositions of do's or don't's; on the needs of a particular installation. Every rather they urge ADP installations to take a risk man- access to a given file or device must be capable agement approach toward evaluating the threats to of being trapped through the access control sys- data, and present ways to help reduce those threats. tem in order to give the capability for additional I urge that these guidelines become standard reading authorization or identification checks. In addition, throughout the Federal, State and Local DP commu- code words (lock words) should be placed within nity, and that they be updated and revised periodically files to prevent reading of sensitive information. as needed. If systems ever are to become certifiable, such guidelines provide a base. In any event, they 3. The security system should support separate iden- provide a starting point for audits, both internally and tification for individual users, terminal stations by by GSA or other interested—agencies. location, individual programs or jobs by name Specifications for RFP's To date, very few Requests and function and data to at least the file level. for Proposal have included definitive requirements for security and integrity. Certainly, if we as users don't 4. All unauthorized access and I/O requests must care about the subject, it becomes very difficult for the result in termination of job, soundingof an alarm, manufacturers to include it in the design of their sys- purging of queues and refusal of service to the tems. If we do care about the subject, it is about time offending terminal/station. A maximum of three we put our money where our mouth is. Therefore, in invalid log-ons or requests for information must a spirit of User's Lib, I am presenting an outline of a be alowed before a given process is terminated. model set of specifications for requesting secure com- puter services or systems: 5. A journal or accounting log must be used to L The computer and communications hardware capture information related to log-ons, terminal/ should come equipped with basic security capa- user identification, data requested, files accessed, bilities. They should include at least the following: data created and security violations. This raw data can then be formatted by user written pro- a. Two modes . . . privileged and user (or grams to produce meaningful reports. master/slave) b. Boundary control registers, permission reg- These specs won't guarantee security, but they pro- isters, memory protect keys or a base ad- vide a useful departure point. They also provide a very dressing scheme for core limits protection. small subset of what is required. The main point is that c. Positive hardware identification of terminals they address some of the real needs of contemporary and peripherals. systems. 36Conclusion covered earlier. If you do nothing else after thissession, do the following: Achieving security in computer networks is a greater 1. Plan for networks; they are the wave of the future. challenge than achieving it in stand-alone systems. In either case, the exercise may be like chasing one's own 2. Write security into the specifications and RFP's tail. However, we have looked at home reasons why for computer services and equipment. achieving an adequate level of security in ntworks is possible, even with today's technology. The necessary, 3. Install controls in systems from the very begin- but not sufficient conditions are minimum standards of ning. physical, procedural, backup security and audit. Pos- 4. Contmually assess and audit those controls. tulated were a number of possibilities for enhancing system security, most of them available in current net- If these actions are accomplished, the goal of simple, works. There are many challenges yet to face you as isolatable, mediatable, measurable and flexible security users of network services. Some possibilities have been controls will be very much a current possibility. COMPUTER SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE AND ACCESS CONTROLS Oliver R. Smoot Computer and Business Equipment Manufacturers Association 1828 L Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20037 This morning we heard about the current and pro- technology needed to respond to new requirements. The posed statutory environment in which systems dealing first two papers this afternoon will concentrate on two with information on individuals will have to operate; of the most important issues raised at the November and just a few minutes ago, we heard the viewpoints conference, the first on protection of data from obser- of the computer manufacturer and the computer pro- vation through encryption and the second on control fessional. Now we'll begin to deal with the technical of access to systems resources. Our last two papers aspects of fulfilling some of these requirements set out present important contrasts between the concept of the this morning and in November. architecture of self-protecting computer systems and In this first section we will continue this format of then management's role in implementing security re- discussing what exists today and then dealing with the gardless of the hardware base. SECURITY ARCHITECTURE USING ENCRYPTION Richard R. Keys and Eric H. Clamons Honeywell Corporation, Phoenix, Arizona 85005 Encryption has been extremely successful in pre- Encryption by itself has not been found sufficient to serving the security of private message traffic. So, why protect a system, but when made part of a secure en- not use it for preserving the security of information vironment it can increase protection without causing contained in computers? This appears to be a good severe economic impact. idea, but several questions must be answered: Data in Motion • In which parts of a computer system can encryp- tion and decryption be performed? When we thi—nk of encryption, most of us think of • What protection improvements will encryption coded messages transmission of written information, provide? What are its limitations? and more recently, transmission of data by electronic means from one location to another. Messages are • Is there a cost/performance penalty to be paid for coded in order to protect against unauthorized inter- the introduction of encryption techniques? ception such as monitoring of radio transmission? and 37tapping of land lines. For this reason, techniques for ceiving the transfer. Transfers should not be encrypted encoding messages, particularly for classified military for unit record devices such as the line printer, con- and other government classified communications have sole, card reader, or some of the tape or disk drives. been developed. More complications arise from changing the key or As a result, a variety of electronic encryption/de- permitting the use of multiple keys. cryption devices are now manufactured. Secure com- munications are maintained through a pair of such Protection within the System devices by placing one encryption device at each end of the communications link. The data to be transmitted The mechanisms just described provide protection is fed into the first device where it is encoded and sent of a tape or disk if it is stolen and physically removed across the link; the second device receives the message, to another computer system. Protection can also be decodes it and outlines the data in its original form. provided against unauthorized attempts to read the These devices can be designed so that each one can tape or disk on the same system. The encryption de- either encode or decode, allowing two-way communi- vices can be controlled by software-loadable keys. Each cations. They can be designed so that the code can be user provides a key to the system that matches his selected from among many by means of a key. By tape or disk. periodically changing the keys in the two devices the A more complicated scheme is necessary when files degree of security can be enhanced. are shared (fig. 2). Data is divided up according to category of information. Each category is assigned to Data at Rest a different enc—ryption key. Each user is provided with a list of keys the keys corresponding to the data he As contrasted to data —in motion, data at rest is data has permission to access. We call this a need-to-know in a semipermanent file data on magnetic tape, data protection scheme. on Magnetic Disk, or even data in main storage. Here is an example of how this scheme might be The amount of encryption that can be performed used: ed ne cp re yn pd ts i, onof dc eo vu ir cs ee s, ao vn ait lh ae blc eo .st Foa rnd thp eer mf oo mr ema nn tce weof wt ih le l A bank's data processing system contains records of assume the existence of an encryption device having its savings accounts, checking accounts and loans. Customer names are encrypted using one key, sav- no cost and having no performance limitations. Later, we will consider cost and performance constraints. ings account balances using another, and so on. Programs to report to the IRS are given the keys to access name, social security number, and interest Protection of Media amounts. Privacy of account balances and activity The most obvious way of providing encryption on a records can be assured. tape or disk is to install an encryption device on each This scheme has several advantages over conven- tape or disk drive in line with the data path to the tional file access control mechanisms: recording head (fig. lA). With everything on the tape or disk in code, the tape or disk is protected in case it • A file can be broken into pieces finer than the is stolen, and it is easier to dispose of when it is no normally provided segment. longer needed. • There are no large tables to match user names to This configuration has the disadvantage that a large file names. number of encryption devices are required. This num- ber can be reduced by placing the encryption devices • It is not necessary to guarantee that a table access in the peripheral control units instead of in each tape check is performed every time a file is opened. or disk drive (fig. IB). For this configuration the en- There are disadvantages to the use of encryption cryption device must be designed to be set, enabled, alone to protect files from unauthorized access: or disabled by the peripheral control unit. Fortunately, transfers in a peripheral control unit are tagged as data • Encryption does not prevent files from being writ- or control. This permitsencoding of data which is to be ten over and thus destroyed. Therefore, it would recorded by a peripheral device, while not encoding be absolutely necessary to have a good back-up peripheral control and status information. But this con- file system. figuration does not achieve exactly the same results as in figure lA. On magnetic disks, the record identifier • In order to protect files from professional code adn key fields cannot be encrypted because they must breakers, it is necessary to change all keys peri- be interpreted by the device during search operations. odically. When this is done, all files may be copied For many applicaitons, this may be acceptable since and recorded using the new keys. the data itself isstill encrypted. The encryption device can also be placed in the Protection of Data in Main Storage input/output controller (fig. IC), but now the encryp- tion device must be enabled or disabled not only ac- This mechanism can be extended to protect data in cording to whether control, status, or data is being main storage as in a timesharing system when many transmitted, but according to which peripheral is re- users' data are simultaneously present. 38C[STRM PROCLSSIM". UMT MAIN 5TOK^C[ INPLIT/OLITPUT CEMk'XL CONTKOLLER PROrESSINC UMT PERIPHERAL CONTROL MAIN UNIT STORAGE CENTRAI PROCESSING UNIT PERIPHERAL CONTROL UNIT C\K'0 DRIVES I'NIT Figure 1. Encryption devices may be placed in the individualdisk or tape drives, in the peripheral control units, or in the input/ output controller. More encryption devices are required when they are placed in the disk and tape drives. The encryption device is more difficult to use when placed in the input/output controller. 39tional segment descriptor, base/bounds protection USERS SECONDARY mechanism, or lock and key protection mechanism is STORAGE still necessary. What good is it to encrypt data in main storage if A we still need the existing protection mechanism? The A B size and complexity of the existing mechanisms can be reduced. This is an important consideration when it becomes necessary to certify a protection scheme. Pres- ent efTorts to make a system certifiably secure are B directed toward the creation of a security "kernel." C The "kernel'' is a set of highly privileged programs D D with the power to impose access restrictions on the rest of the system. The proposed proof of correctness techniques can only be appHed to a small amount of code. If a small enough kernel can be isolated then, C theoreticaly, it can be proven secure. D E E Economic Factors We have encryption devices fast enough and cheap enough for use in communications. These are capable of speeds up to 500,000 bits per second. Software rou- Figure 2. Each user can be given keys to the files he has the tines that provide encryption secure enough for com- right to access. mercial applications can run at 10,000 bits per second. But tape, disk and main storage have much higher First, it will be necessary to put an encryption device transfer rates. Tapes can transfer data at 2,000,000 between the CPU and main storage (fig. 3A). Second, bits per second. Disks can transfer at 6,000,000 bits it will be necessary to find a means of handling control per second and up. Some main storage units can trans- information for I/O devices and data for the printer. fer at 200,000,000 bits per second. This can be done in several ways: Of course, we can improve the performance of most • T unh ie t rc eh ca on rn de sl cp ar nog bera lm efs t a innd ded ca ot da edfo fr ort mran insfe mr ait no d ci og si tta wl ild lev oi fc te es n b riy sein ec xr pe oa ns ei nn tg ialp la yr .all Aeli rs em a, sob nu at bls eize upa pn ed r storage. This means that the encryption device limit on the size of a commercial encryption device is will have to be turned on and off under program around 200 TTL packages. This is about four average- control, adding certain complexities to the CPU sized printed circuit boards as compared to over 100 program. The CPU. for instance, must know the of these boards for a medium-size central processing difference between data destined for the printer unit. and data destined for tape, to be printed later. It has been estimated that sequential bit stream en- This distinction may not necessarily be visible to cryption devices of this size capable of 10,000.000 the programmer. bits per second can be built. Such a device would be suitable for tape and disk applications, but for use • Encryption devices can be added to the I/O con- between a CPU and storage it will be necessary to trollers to decode the channel programs and data obtain a device that is both faster and capable of when necessary (fig. 3B). operation in a random access mode. • The encryption device can be placed in the main The Future storage unit. Keys and control information would be sent from the CPU and I/O controller at the Thus we are currently limited by a lack of better, same times addresses are sent (fig. 3C). faster encryption techniques and speedier, less costly When the encryption device is placed between the circuits. Fortunately, we are by no means at the end CPU and storage it must operate on small fields. This of our technological capability. Large Scale Integration restricts the type of encryption algorithm that can be (LSI) holds a promise that encryption may be feasible used. Several keys will have to be kept in CPU registers in a CPU. associated with registers containing addresses such as Other problems to be solved are mainly problems of the instruction counter or base registers. These keys getting more out of encryption schemes and devices: must be loaded and unloaded when the corresponding • Providing master and submaster key capability address registers are changed. for distributing need-to-know level information stoI rt agw ei ,ll anb de tn he ec se ess ta ar by let so wih la lve hat va ebl te os bo ef pk re oy ts ecti en d.ma Wi en from multiply-encoded files. cannot rely on encryption for al of our protection. Even • Implementation of the ring properties for multi- if the tables of keys were encrypted, the key used for privilege access control or the star properties for that encryption would require protection. So a conven- multilevel government security classifications.CENTRAL CENTRAL PROCESSING PROCESSING UNITm UNIT m MAIN ENCRYPTION MAIN ENCRYPTION STORAGE DEVICE STORAGE DEVICES INPUT/OUTPUT INPUT/OUTPUT CONTROLLER CONTROLLER PERIPHERALS PERIPHERALS CENTRAL PROCESSING UNIT INPUT/OUTPUT CONTROLLER ENCRYPTION DEVICE PERIPHERALS Figure 3. Three configurations for providing encryption in main storage. Configuration A may not be practical because of com- plexities in controlling the encryption device The choice between configurations B and C depends upon the design of the main storage/processor interface and the number of main, storage modules. Encryption does help to provide secure systems. tecture using encryption will depend on the willingness However, encryption technology is a specialty of gov- of the appropriate government agencies to help develop ernments. Because commercial demand for secure sys- the algorithms necessary to satisfy the design criteria tems has been low there are too few technicians avail- of data processing machines. able to industry. The ultimate success of security archi- 41ACCESS CONTROLS IN BURROUGHS LARGE SYSTEMS Harvey W. Bingham Burroughs Corporation, Paoli, Pennsylvania 19301 Burroughs Access Control Philosophy The user has a choice of extra levels of controlled sharing if he desires. Access control means to authorize access requests for resources or data in a computer system based on an acceptable identification; and to resist unauthorized Design Objectives penetration. Access control should minimally impede The data processing system should be easy for the authorized use. We assume adequate physical and administrative user to use. The user needs only a high level language security precautions are taken. We also assume the need for programming. Resource sharing should be easy for the user. The for sharing the use of the system rather than dedicating MCP should allocate and moderate usage of all physi- its use. cal and logical resources. The owning user specifies Language barriers are the primary means to realize access controls in the Burroughs large systems, the privileges to others for his files and/or programs. Hierarchic structures should provide controlled par- B6700 and B7700. Language barriers are means to titioning internally to keep users separated, except prevent users from being able to directly manipulate through user-approved interaction points. nay part of the system. Instead, users only use high Limiting error spreading is essential to real, imper- level languages, and language processors interpret pro- fect systems. Hardware error detection and subsequent grams in these languages, and either immediately im- isolation should provide control during degradation. pose control, or insert control checks for later invoca- tion. The user is unaware of the presence of access controls unless some unauthorized request is made. Software Barriers for Access Control Dynamic self-regulation of system resources by the Master Control Progra —m (MCP), or operating system, User programming is done in higher level languages achieves basic integrity the system remains in control only. L'ser programs are referred to as source pro- as work flows through it. Jobs remain separate al- grams. Every user source program must be compiled though resources are shared. into object code before it can be executed. user creates object program source program -> COMPILER > PROCESSOR file execute-only file Any compiler is an object program. It obeys all the Object programs of other users can only be used if rules of object programs, except: their owner declares them to be public. Like any object program, they are execute-only. a privileged action is required to make an object program into a compiler. High Level Languages Only A hierarchy of languages exists to support the users only a compiler can generate object code. and system. None of them are assemblylevel languages, nor do any have ways to escape to such a low level Access controls are automatically included in all language. object programs by the compilers. Experience with older systems allowing assembly All object programs are execute-only, they are never language programming, and execution of data as code data to a user. No ability exists to execute data as if it leads to the assertion within Burroughs that such sys- were object code. Object code never accesses any re- tems can never be secured. source directly. The MCP mediates all resource re- Application programmers use the standard lan- quests. guages The system compilers-—DCALGOL and ESPOL, are restricted in use to small parts of the system. Compiler COBOL FORTRAN EXTENDED ALGOL writers do not need these compilers. PL/1 BASIC APL 42The constraint on these languages is that improper The usercode is a public name; it can be displayed programming can only damage the programmer's own or listed. It is created by the installation and does program or files. not change. All compilers and most MCP and utility routines are The password is a name private to the owner; it can written in EXTENDED ALGOL. not be displayed or listed. The owner may change it Supervisory programmers use a further extension any time. Multiple passwords are permitted to allow of ALGOL called DECAGOL. This language also in- multiple users of an account. cludes means to establish controls across users. The Authentication beyond this basic form is the appli- constraint is that no error can harm the MCP. Users cation or installation responsibility. Authentication ad- have included data communications message control dresses the questions: systems, workflow management, system operator inter- face, and rotating memory storage management. Is the user who he claims to be? The writers of the MCP kernel use ESPOL, another Is the remote terminal or computer who it claims ALGOL extension. These critical MCP functions in- to be? clude resource managing, input/output handling, and The process of controlling and protecting account authorization checking. ESPOLpermits access to physi- passwords is extremely important. Access, once into cal hardware and memory addresses, and so is funda- the account, is permitted to any files or programs cre- mentally dangerous. It is only used where necessary. ated and thus owned by that account. The account Links are provided to utilities written in better pro- owner determines access privileges for others to any tected languages. of its files and programs. Thus the account owner con- trols sharing of his files and programs with other ac- counts. Master Control Program The master control program owns and controls all Privileged Userdatafile resources. The MCP verifies all user requests for ac- cess to any of these resources. The MCP provides re- The system supervisor has a privileged account. That sources to each user as needed. When so provided, the account is responsible for initiating system accounts user effectively owns them, subject to recall by the and assigning them usercodes. The makeuser utility is MCP. The MCP defines the environment for the user only usable by that supervisor. It creates the privileged and assures that the environments of the various con- Userdatafile. current users do not conflict. All resource requests are Within this file are contained the list of usercodes. made as a result of compiler-generated descriptors. For each usercode, the minimum and maximum num- A descriptor indicates the kind and extent of the re- ber of passwords and the transformed values of cur- quested resource. The MCP completes a descriptor rently valid ones are included. Password transforma- when a resource is allocated. The descriptor thereafter tions are irreversible, so there is no way to determine serves to enforce control. The hardware interprets de- actual passwords from this file. The privileged status scriptors automatically. of each account if any is indicated. The job queues to The hardware access controls apply routinely 100 which the accounts may be attached are listed. percent of the time. They provide a secondary level The MCP uses the information in the Userdatafile of protection. In normal operation, the software access as one basis for its access control decisions. controls are sufficient. Memory integrity is basic. Address bounds apply to Job Queue Classes constrain access to only aflocated areas. Tag bits en- force proper use of every memory word data, pro- An account may be restricted in the subset of system : gram, or control uses are separately indicated. These resources available to it. The resources include hard- tag bits cannot be changed by user action. ware, software and class of service capabilities. Error detection and controls sense hardware failure A set of job queues are provided, each with its own and limit the effects. Both the B6700 and B7700 use capability list and usercode list. parity checks. The B7700 also uses residue, continuity, Any job by a usercode is constrained by the capabil- illegal value or instruction checks. ity list of the job queue to which it can be attached. Interrupts from normal internal or external events and from detected errors return control to the MCP. File Security Processor state is a further check. Almost all exe- cution is in normal state. Only the MCP can execute Files are the basic units for an account to retain and in control state the privileged instructions. share data. The account owns the file and controls accesses to it through specification of file access attri- butes. System Access and File Access The security type defines the form of access control: Access to the system by a potential user is controlled by account identification. The usercode and password public (class A) are the basic identifiers. anyone knowing name can access 43guarded (class B) environment is provided. A Message Control System owner define? accesses for others (MCS) interfaces and services any remote user. This private can be a standard MCS or can be specialized to the only owner can access application. The remote user establishes connection and identifies The security use defines for public files the allowable himself with the login function. use: in, out. both, or secured from use. For the standard message control systems Remote The security guard names the private guardfile if the Job Entry and Command and Edit, a validated user- file is guarded. code and password gives access to that account and Guard File all therein as previously described. For a user-tailored MCS, additional identification A guard file guards another file. The guard file con- and authentication procedures can be developed. These tains rules for access from other accounts. can include terminal self-identification. ^user program^ The interactive APL language is a good example of a specially tailored MCS that uses its own account j file access request wn oa rm de . a Tn hd e k Ae Py Lwo ur sd erin hap sla bc ee eo nf pt rh oe viu ds ee drc mo od re ean sed lep ca ts is v- e access protection and control. Different names and keywords apply for account, workspaces and files. request including usercode, Locked functions can hide any knowledge of file names program name, access type and keywords. An APL application can thus be made secure for others to use it. ^ guard file ^ The logoff function returns control to a more global process. This process records actions, disconnects, and 1 honor request only if ok recovers resources no longer required. ^guarded file^ Data Management System During execution of a program under a different ac- The Burroughs Data Management System maintains count, if an access is requested to the guarded file, the and manages a data base in support of multiple user MCP checks the guard file and honors the request only requests for file action. if authorized. The standard Data Management System provides The access alternatives available for granting to pro- management functions including: resource control, se- grams running under other usercodes include permis- curity, audit trail, recovery, and contention resolution. mission to: The application designer, building on the Data Management System, can easily specify custom user only read controls in COBOL. These controls are processes that only write run before or after file actions for a user. The controls read or write are activated whenever the data base is opened by only execute (object code file) any user. The controls run as an independent job Absence of a usercode in—the guard file denies any associated with the data base; not under control of the access to the guarded file it is secured from that user program. The application user is unaware of their account. execution so long as the user requests are proper. The The guard file is private to the user and the privi- user controls can perform arbitrary functions, includ- leged MCP. The MCP is its only user. ing access control and logging. Limiting Operator Privilege Obstacles to Penetration The supervisory console is a privileged position re- The penetrator must circumvent many access con- quiring physical and administrative control. From this position most security checks and access controls are trols. The primary software controls provide language bar- pb ay tp eass we id t. h T th hi es Mis Cd Pone iss do yt nh aat mit che seo lp fe -r ra et go ur lac tia on npa or fti tc hi- e tri he ers cot mo pim li es ra scce ts hs at: t ph re ocM esC sP, sout rh ce eut pi rl oit gi re as mi st ,pr ao nv dide ts h, e system. controls embedded in the execute-only object code for At installation option, the operator can be denied run-time application. the capability to create usercodes, specify privileged The secondary hardware controls enforce software users, or make an object code file into a compiler. controls through memory access checks, and limit ef- The operator can not determine passwords. fects on error detection. Remote User Security The owner specified controls are transparent to those users and uses that the owner has specified. The Data The central system assumes that physical and com- Management System conveniently packages many of munications security for data beyond its immediate these optional access controls for easy application. 44Summary and Conclusions Any particular application can further specialize the access controls to its needs. Any installation can select The architects of the Burroughslarge systems antici- those access control extensions it requires and is willing pated safe sharing of resources among users. The de- to pay for. sign is to good commercial practice, but is not claimed The Burroughs large systems aim has been to pro- to be 100 percent impenetrable. It provides many ac- vide adequate access controls to resist unauthorized cess controls to resist penetration. access. Building from this strong base, an ongoing pro- Software language barriers are effective as the first gram of product enhancements will support additional lines of control. Hardware supports these controls by access control needs as the market requires. providing a cross-check should error occur. SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE FOR SECURITY AND PROTECTION James P. Anderson James P. Anderson Company, Ft. Washington, Pennsylvania 19034 Introduction could exist in multi-programmed systems if there were not some means available to prevent user programs The purpose of this paper is to outline the role of from interfering with each other and with the operating computer systems architecture in providing computer system. As a result of this (and other considerations), security and data protection. It will cover the main these systems had base and bound (sometimes base trends in computer architecture as these impact the registers and storage locks) registers to establish the security problem. beginning and extent of a user program. Attempts to The primary impetus to modifications in computer reference outside of these limits by a user program architecture in the past has come from considerations would trap to the supervisor for disposition. For some of efficiency. From the first introduction of "B"-boxes time this was thought to provide adequate security for to provide efficient address modification for calculation a system. However, it is interesting to note that none loops to modern computers with multi-state operation of many penetration exercises have attempted to bypass modes and instruction (sub) sets specialized for com- the base-bounds registers directly; they have instead putation or data handling the emphasis on systems ar- exploited the fact that the supervisory program re- chitecture has been efficiency. The past decade has quires full memory addressing capability, and that seen the rise of systems architectural features aimed such addressing is granted to at improving the efficiency with which a computer sys- tem can be used in production environments. Thus, we (a) access parameters in user space have today computer systems designed to handle multi- (b) return results to user programs programming, multiple job streams, on-line operations, even though the functions being called are common interactive programming and the like. The main thrust service functions rather than resource allocation and of these developments has been motivated by a desire management functions. to get the most use out of what has been an expensive resource. These operational capabilities also made it possible Isolation as a Fundamental Security to efficiently share information and program resources Principle among a variety of users of a system. However, in order to share these resources efficiently, it became Just as the major impetus for architectural innova- necessary to make them available on demand. Further, tions in the past was efficiency of operations, the im- the requirement for sharing placed a burden on the petus of architectural innovations for security and pro- computer system of having to control who would share tection is to provide isolation mechanisms that cannot what, and how the sharing is to take place. be bypassed by users exercising normal (user) pro- Until there were computer systems with the function- gramming control of a system. Further, in examining al capabilities associated with resource sharing, the the problem, it becomes clear that the "users program" primary security mechanism that existed was isolation. is not just the code he has written, but includes all of The isolation approach physically separated sensitive the supervisory, monitor or operating system programs data from all others, and guaranteed the integrity of executed on his behalf. that data by running programs that referred to it in If the isolation principle is not extended to the su- isolation. When the processing of the sensitive data was pervisory programs that provide the '"environment complete, the file media were removed from the sys- for a program, it is then necessary to be able to prove tem, and the machine cleared of any residue in mem- that these (considerable) programs are secure and ory to preserve the isolation. As will be discussed, iso- implemented correcdy. This is a task most people lation as a security technique is being rediscovered. will accept as impossible with today's state-of-the-art. The designers of early third generation computers However, there are means of avoiding the problem of a decade ago focused on the potential for chaos that by including the bulk of the operating system and its 45supervisory or monitor programs within the isolation proaches to provide the type of isolation discussed envelope surrounding the execution of programs for a above; virtual machine systems and virtual memory given user. Once the idea is conceived, the problem systems. The latter, not to be confused with the mar- becomes one of finding efficient mechanisms to accom- keting terminology of some manufacturers, are fre- plish the desired result. quently referred to as descriptor-based systems. While there are numerous reasons other than se- curity or protection for adopting certain architectural approaches for systems designs, the balance of this Virtual Machine Systems paper will be concerned with those derived from con- sideration of security and protection. The virtual machine system approach to creating an isolated environment is characterized by designing Security Versus System Functionality a small operating system and using the technique of multi-programming to make available to each user It is well recognized that the degree of security an interface to the computer that is functionally equiv- threat a user of a computer system poses is a function alent to a complete "raw" or "bare" machine and in of how that user is able to make use of the system. which there are no restrictions on the type or category This is often couched in terms of whether the user of instructions that can be executed. This is contrasted can program the system, usually in machine language. with the conventional two state operating system ap- The concern with the functionality provided to a user proach which, in order to protect itself restricts the is focused on the fact that with a programming capa- user from executing certain instructions; notably 1/0, bility, a user may be able to exploit any errors in and those others that are specified as "privileged" (to design or implementation of the operating system, and the supervisory state of the system). escape from the isolation envelope surrounding his The operating system that creates this environment program. Alternatively, even if he is eflfectively con- is known as a virtual machine monitor (VMM), and tained in his envelope it may be possible for the mali- consists primarily of programs that provided interpre- cious user to cause the operating system to supply data tive execution for privileged instructions that are about itself or others users on the system by supplying trapped to it, as well as the minimal controls to initiate unexpected parameters in system calls, or executing and discontinue virtual machines and the controls to system functions out of an expected sequence. Rather effect time-multiplexing of virtual machines on a single than speculate on the methods that might be available set of hardware. A major portion of VMM's is devoted to a malicious programmer, it is sufficient to note that to interpreting I/O (for integrity and correct opera- with an increase in functionality provided to a user tion on a VM) and simulating to the VM such controls there is need to include the operating system itself in as interrupts, error indications and the like. With each the isolation envelope or to assure completely the cor- user having functionally a complete "raw" machine of rectness of its design and implementation. his own, in which it doesn't matter whether the instruc- Where the user of the system does not have the tions being executed are privileged or not, it is of capability to execute arbitrary program sequences, as significantly less security importance whether the oper- in a system that interprets transaction parameters, the ating system running in a virtual machine is correctly user is in effect isolated by the application itself. designed and implemented, since in the extreme, each user can be provided with his own copy of the operat- Architectural Approaches for Security ing system, thus, completely closing off any possibility of interaction between two virtual machines. The form VM There have been basically two architectural ap- of a operation is illustrated below: VMM OS OS OS Virtual Machine Real User 1 User 2 User n (and User) \ Machine program program program Address Space Address Space VMl VM2 VMn 46This is contrastedwith ordinary multiprogramming use grammer by isolating him in a single (virtual) ma- which can be represented as: chine. It also eliminates the need to be concerned with OS User 1 User 1 Address Space program : User 2 User 2 Real Machine and OS Address Space program (privileged) Address Space User 3 User 3 Address Space program User n User n Address Space program The virtual machine approach described here is one the security worthiness of an existing operating sys- that shares only hardware resources, in a way that tem, since in the VM, the operating system can be makes a modern version of the isolation technique thought of (and implemented) as belonging to a single feasible. user. From a security viewpoint, the VM approach pro- Because the \T\IM need be concerned only with the vides the necessary protection from a malicious pro- functions of simulating privileged instructions and thecontrols needed to effect initiation, multiprogramming, the familiar context of an operating system environ- and termination of VM's, it can be quite small com- ment. pared to typical operating systems, and relatively sim- The original motivation for descriptor-based systems ple. These factors are important, since they make it was limitations of real memory on early computer VMM possible to subject the to thorough debugging systems. This had been a problem ever since computers and validation of the design. were first introduced. Ingenious variations on overlays Perhaps the most important aspect of the VM ap- were employed to overcome this limitation and reached proach is that it is one that can be applied to existing a high state of development through the language two-state systems with the (relatively) minor hardware formalisms describing the boundaries for overlays modifications necessary to trap all instructions that (COBOL sections and ALGOL blocks). Descriptors refer to or rely on the state of the system or initiate were important to these developments by providing an I/O operations. extended form of indirect addressing that made it VM It is not expected that the architecture described possible to compile each portion of a program inde- above provides quite enough capability for most users. pendendy of the others in a single pass over the In particular, it is necessary to provide secure (pro- program text. References to other program parts were tected) communications between VM's in order to directed to descriptors which contained pointers to the permit data or program sharing. This could take the location of the required part and ancilary information form of a virtual inter-computer channel and/or a about the part. All of this activity was going on in shared virtual file media. Such a capability could be the ferment of the early developments in multiprogram- used to implement controlled sharing of data bases ming. The developments reached a culmination in the (in addition to the unique data bases included in the development of the Burroughs B5000 in 196L Subse- basic concept) in a separate virtual machine. quent to this development, the GE 645 was developed Finally, the question of the most efficient method of in the multics project at MIT. Descriptors play an im- mutiplexing VM's on a set of hardware depends to portant role in this machine as well as in the Honeywell some extent on whether it is possible to designate some 6180 and other systems under development at the part(s) of the VM's memory as execute only (i.e., end of the decade. read only as instructions; no write) ; in which case A descriptor is a computer word that acts as a form separate copies of a standard operating system might of extended indirect address. When a descriptor is re- not have to be provided to each user. ferenced, control bits contained in the descriptor are The virtual machine system architectural approach interpreted in hardware to mediate the completion of is perhapsmost applicable in service center applications the reference. The mediation that can be accomplished where hardware resources are shared among different includes automatic fetching from secondary storage organizations; each with a need to protect their infor- data and/or program parts recognized not to be in mation and program resources from people outside main storage, automatic type conversion and the like. of their organization. Each organization could be as- Because the descriptor is an economical way of pre- signed a separate virtual machine. The functional needs serving the attributes of the object being represented, of the organization for time-sharing, remote batch, the reference limitation requirements for the object teleprocessing and the like can be met by the capabili- (read only for execution, read-only, write, append, ties of the standard operating system for the base ma- etc.) are included as part of the control. This is an chine run in a virtual machine. Optimization of an important design point because it makes it possible operating system to meet specific functional needsof an to represent the protection requirements of an object organization is easily accommodated without penalty in its descriptor and be assured that there will be to other using organizations. automatic hardware controlled validation of all refer- The virtual machine approach provides a method ence to all objects of a program represented by a de- of sharing hardware securely; it provides no mechan- scriptor. This property makes it possible to use de- isms for sharing other (data or program) resources. scriptors to implement self-protecting systems. These have to be developed within the VM framework. If all of the objects of a program execution are rep- Where the sharing of data and program resources is resented by descriptors (including the implied parts of minimal, the use of pseudo inter machine channels to the operating system) and the descriptors are protected effect access between consenting systems is adequate. from alteration by a user program, the user is isolated Where more comprehensive sharing of program or to a virtual address space (memory) defined by the data resources is required, as in general utility systems, set of descriptors used to represent his program. other approaches appear to provide greaterefficiency. Descriptor protection can be accomplished by pro- viding extra (non computational) bits per word to Descriptor Based Systems distinguish descriptor words from data words (as in the B5000 et. seq.), or by collecting descriptors in a VM In the preceding section, it was stated that sys- table based by a register that is implicitly involved in tems provide isolation by simulating to each user a memory references, yet which can be set only in a programming environment that is essentially a com- privileged state. In either case, the descriptors cannot plete raw or bare machine. Another approach to isolat- be manipulated by a user programmer, thus, providing ing users is to use a descriptor architecture to provide the necessary mechanism to protect the integrity of the each user with a totally independent address space, in isolation envelope. 48With a descriptor capability, a variety of interesting and isolation can be accomplished in descriptor-based systems can be built. However, the major benefit avail- systems is shown in the figure below. The diagram in- able from use of a descriptor controlled virtual ad- dicates that each user program can execute the oper- dressing approach is the ability to provide precise con- ating system service functions and its own code within trol over sharing of programs or data by including the the addressing context established by the descriptor object to be shared as a descriptor in the sharing pro- table, can cal on the operating system resource man- gram with the protection control bits set to control agement functions (e.g., to obtain additional storage, how the object may be referenced. or perhaps another program dynamically), and read A highly simplified representation of how sharing and write its own data. Common ibrary programs can also be shared among different program as can data. 49What Else is Needed? because they present an operating system environment VM to user programmers (as opposed to a bare or raw Both the and descriptor-based systems provide machine environment provided by the VM approach) the basic ingredient of security and protection in re- they must also include authorization mechanisms to source-shared systems; isolation. For this reason, both control sharing of program and data objects contained 'schools' of architecture are being pursued in connec- in the system. Both of these mechanisms, the additional tion with secure computer systems. Beyond the basic mechanism that establishes and maintains the users mechanism for isolation, both approaches need addi- 'context' (i.e. descriptor table), and the descriptor ta- tional security components to control initial access to bles must be protected from alteration by user pro- the respective systems. grams. Additional Security Components for VM's Summary maT chh ie nepr ai pm pa rr oy acs hecu isri at ny ac uo tn ht oro rl izan te ie od ned mei cn hat nhe isv mirt tu ha al t curT ih tye am na dj po rr ots ey cts it oe nms ima pr lc ehi mt ee nc ttu tr ha el ia sop lp ar to ia onch pe rs inct io pls ee .- validates a user's authority to initiate (create) a vir- In the virtual machine approach, users are provided tual machine. The mechanism must be based on some form of authenticated unique identification. Because it i tus ao llat me ed mv oi rrt yua al ppm ra oc ah ci hn ,es u. seI rn s at rhe e pd res oc vr ii dp et dor i- sb oa ls ae td edv ii nr -- controls initial access to the virtual systemsthe author- dependent virtual address spaces. Both approaches must ization mechanism must be an integral part of the VMM, and protected from alteration by VM's running be augmented with used identification and authoriza- tion mechanisms to provide a complete secure environ- under it. If virtual machines are allocated on a per- ment. The VM approach appears especially attractive user basis, the authorization mechanism will also have for providing the basic system self-protection needed to maintain a list of all possible users and the program for environments such as service centers primarily con- and data resources belonging to each, in order to estab- cerned with sharing hardware resources. The descrip- lish the correct configuration of virtual machine. tor based virtual memory approach has greater appli- If virtual machines are shared, as in a service center for example, the VMM would only have to maintain an cability where on-line time-sharing or utility-like sys- VM tems are needed and where there is a major require- authority to initiate a (if it is not del Veg Mated to ment to share programs and/or data. the center operators). Authorization to use a or its program and data resources can be handled by the autborization mechanisms available in the operating References system for each VM. 1. Buzen, J. P. Gagliardi, U. 0., Introduction to Virtual Ma- chines, Honeywell Computer Journal, Vol. 7, No. 4, 1973. Additional Security Components for 2. Organick, E. I., The Multics System (The MIT Press, Cam- Descriptor-Based Systems bridge, Massachusetts and London, England, 1972). 3. System/3000 External Reference Specifications (Hewitt The descriptor-based systems also need authorization 4. BurP ra oc uk ga hr sd BC 6o. 7, 00De Ic ne fm orb me ar ti1 o9 n71 P) r. ocessing Systems Reference mechanisms to control use of the system. However, Manual, Burroughs Corp., Detroit, Michigan (1969). PRAGMATIC APPROACHES TO SOFTWARE SECURITY Richard L. Caplan Advanced Computer Techniques Corporation, New York, N.Y. 10022 I work for a consulting firm. Consultants are forced At best, computer security must be viewed as a five- to deal with the world as it really exists and it rarely dimensional problem. The first and most obvious di- conforms to theoretical models. I would imagine most mension is physical security which I have euphemis- of you are similarly involved in one way or another tically labeled "the fox in the chicken coup" problem with existing installations that have multi-million dollar to suggest the fact that when we lock our machine commitments in hardware and user programs. I am room doors we are essentially locking our insecurities going to describe three case studies that demonstrate in since the people that we may have the most reason my company's activities in a security context involv- to fear are our own technical and operational person- ing actual users like yourselves. I am going to talk nel. about strategies and products that we have had to de- This intentionally provocative comment should im- velop in order to solve existing problems, and I will mediately suggest thesecond security exposure and that attempt in turn to draw conclusions about the nature is a "motivational" one. It is reflected by a need for of software security in general. evaluation and monitoring of the emotional stability of technical personnel on an on-going basis. I find 50myself particularly well-suited to comment on this presented to a particular audience only on a "need to point since I have had relatively long hair and some- know" basis as determined by job function require- what unorthodox political views for years, and I there- ments within the DP context. fore have personal knowledge of the tendency of EDP In summary, my company tends to view a significant management to consider programmers and analysts as component of the total software security problem as basically a weird lot. And yet there is, surprisingly, a the adequate definition and control of system documen- lack of concern manifested by these same managers tation. In this regard we approached the creation of for the reliability of subordinate technicians in terms integrated documentation system for a computer man- of their handling of sensitive data files and computer ufacturer by first undertaking a need-to-know analysis programs. geared to the various classes of potential users of the The third security exposure I have labeled "commu- documentation. Each user's informational requirements nicative." It involves the propagation of cross-talk or as well as existing pathsof flow of technical data within "noise" within existing official communication chan- the on-going operation were analyzed. We were able nels (or subrosa unofficial paths) among DP profes- to process the results statistically and to determine with sionals. This threat to computer security consists of relative accuracy the classes of data which could be the uncontrolled availability of vital information and profitable excluded from various manuals to improve its dissemination by mouth or written word between both readability and usefulness, and at the same time the technical and user communities. increase total security by denying to any individual The fourth security exposure has been labeled, for more information than was explicitly necessary for the want of a better word, "systematic" and applies to the performance of his role. To do this we created the faults that may be found in what we buy or rent from concept of a documentation "template." This is in es- the computer manufacturers. While we all hope, no sence an outline of a document format designed to fit doubt, that the understanding and heightened technical the needs of a particular audience. Thus, there may be awareness of the manufacturers will tend to minimize more than one kind of manual describing the same the faults in computer products, both hardware and subject if audience requirements are variable. Each software. We must be cognizant of the fact that the template initially took the form of a gross table of development of these products is often predicated on contents for a single document aimed at a single au- the performance of delicate balancing tests or trade- dience. Of course, the price paid for increased security offs of cost effectiveness, which are conditioned both by was some degree of redundancy between manuals de- state of the art technology and the vicissitudes of the scribing the samesystem as seen by different audiences. marketplace. We know both as users and consultants Over the years a master file of these templates has that we are often the ultimate discoverors of such faults been created and detailed instructions have been devel- within computer products, and our efforts to communi- oped for driving the technical "flesh" needed to fill out cate them precisely to the manufacturers represent a each skeletal structure. We have refined this approach substantial service to the industry as a whole. to the point where it can be meaningfuly automated The fifth and last major computer security exposure so that relevant system documentation is stored and I have designated as "constructive." It arises through maintained as an adjunct to actual program libraries the propagation of security gaps within applications on mass storage devices. This approach insures that programs and user software which we create ourselves modifications of the program cannot be completed within the total environment supplied by the computer without corresponding modifications to the descriptive manufacturer. It is to this area of user program securi- documents. It also allows user access control, pres- ty that the balance of this address will be dedicated. ently restricted to the programs themselves, to be ap- Let us now turn to consider the three practical case plied to their documentation as well. Availability of studies. The first of these involves interface manage- audit trails and access lists to documentation may be ment. In the computer world "the manual is the mes- extremely valuable in determining those individuals sage" to coin a phrase. The complexities of an opera- who have sufficient access to technical information to tional computer system, with its nested layers of pro- represent potential threats from a security view-point. cedure, software, and hardware, are generally reflected These techniques for the control of technical docu- within written descriptions of capabilities so that to the mentation are fully justified by the fact that technical user the system appears to be a collection of manuals. personnel are in no position to outwit a complex soft- In this sense, every real system defined by a set of ware system unless and until they have detailed knowl- manuals is truly a virtual system, the details of which edge of how the existing system operates. This is only can be functionally manipulated by changing the writ- available through manuals or inputs from other tech- ten description within limits loosely established by the nicians who have access to manuals. Therefore, by actual implementations of the hardware/software en- controlling this information, we minimize if not totally vironment. By controlling the image of the machinery eliminate the temptation to manipulate the DP environ- as it appears to different users through documentation, ment for personal gain. one could go a long way toward reducing the security The second case study involves the development of exposure incident to uncontrolled technical cross-talk. a sophisticated, real-time environment simulator for One might in effect manipulate ambiguity in the serv- use in testing an on-line reservations system. \^hile ice of security within the contents of manuals so that systems testing per se may not, on the surface, appear specific sub-sets of sensitive information would be to be closely related to security, it is my judgment that 51software insecurity is directly traceable to inadequate mechanism. In this manner a higher level of user cre- program testing. In particular, if we have no viable ated software security was assured. techniques for accurately determining what a program Turning now to the last and most sophisticated of does, it may be virtually impossible to determine if and the three case studies, let us consider the problem of when the program is doing something extraordinary measuring the conformance of user created application which represents a breach of security. In this regard, programs to their functional specifications. The tradi- complex real-time systems present what initially appear tional approach to testing of an application's program to be insurmountable system test problems. While ini- must be viewed as a self-confirming prophecy. When tial algorithms may be reasonably tested within a lab- you send a programmer out to develop a system whose oratory context, final testing must involve manipula- functional specifications you have supplied, he cer- tion of both the temporal and data content dimensions tainly will not come back to you and tell you that the if all processing paths are to be validated. This requires system works unless it does at least what you have the production of statistically representative transaction told him it is supposed to do. Unfortunately, the vital samples which fully exercise all of the features of the security question is not whether it does this much, but system under test. To accomplish this on a manual rather, does it do more than you told the programmer basis is virtually impossible, particularly when the it was supposed to do. In other words, has the devel- number of remote terminals is in the hundreds and the oper of the program, either inadvertently or by design, number of valid transaction types could and did fill added to the functional capabilities of the final product a book. features which represent a threat to the integrity of While we had done a substantial amount of theoret- your installation or your data files. Placingthe program ical toying with a real-time environment simulation into the job stream on a production basis clearly is concept, we received our initial impetus to develop such not an efficient way of determining if such hidden cap- a tool when a major company with a reservation sys- abilities exist. Unfortunately, however, the manager tem asked us to come in and help them check it out often has no recourse but to place the program in in an economically and technologically reasonable way. service and hope that six months or a year later he We propose the direct coupling of two processors, one does not discover, at great expense to his company, of which would house the user's application program that the program has all the while been creating a and TP monitor and the other the environment simu- financial nest egg for the programmer or accumulating lator written by us. They would be connected by a proprietary data for sale to competitors using the dis- patch panel capable of creating the impact of varia- tribution facilities available in the company mail room. ble sets of remotely terminated communications lines Faced with this vexing problem, which is characteristic of representative band widths. This would allow dy- of virtually all applications development environments, namic modification of the on-line remote hardware my company has set about to define an algorithm capa- environment from test to test. The environment simu- ble of interrogating an object code program to deter- lator treated each transaction as a linguistic sentence mine whether functional specifications traditionally with each message and response a grammatical ele- supplied by the programmer (system specs, flow charts, ment in the total sentence structure. Using this proc- etc.) are in fact telling the truth about what the pro- essing technique and a nodal, tree structure tracing gram does. We have in effect come up with a design for algorithm, each transaction was reduced to a transition a program "lie-detector" designed to assure manage- diagram. Each of the diagrams was in turn related to ment that specifications are an accurate reflection of actual message syntax structure which, in turn, con- program algorithms. Of course, such a system cannot tined variable data elements which could be drawn be developed with a hundred percent accuracy. If this from a dictionary. The simulator was capable of gene- were logically possible, such a system would be capa- rating transactions for submission across lines in real ble of writing the programs in question without pro- time and dispatching them in a manner which reflected grammer intervention based entirely on functional realistic expectations of final operating line loads and specifications provided in the English language. initiation patterns. What we have developed, however, is a system capa- Responses generated by the user's system under test ble of providing meaningful statistical clues as to the could be checked and deviations recorded along with validity of the routines of a program in terms of access message receipt times and hardware error statistics. to data fields within records and the manipulation of The resulting log was interpreted ofl^-line to determine the data items in the service of goals defined by the system performance, both in terms of validly processed program developer. Using our approach it becomes transactions and decay in response time due to in- possible to determine whether a program accesses data creased line loads. The environment simulator did not fields which it was not required to address, whether it only generate valid message sequences, but allowed in- performs arithmetic operations upon data items which tentional statistical inanipulation of transaction compo- were not defined within the intended algorithm, wheth- nents into unacceptable transactions in order to deter- er it causes the permutation of record formats or at- mine whether the target system was capable of dis- tempts to access files which are theoretically unavail- inguishing improper conduct on the part of terminal able, and finally, whether it includes routines whose operators. In this way a host of unforeseen bugs was functions appear ambiguous enough to require expla- uncovered and major security flaws were eliminated by nation by the programmer who performed the coding. providing an exhaustive, statistically based testing The nucleus of our algorithm is a sophisticated flow- 52charting system capable of establishing all of the paths function performed by certified public accountants of through an assembly language program based on the the economic integrity of commercial companies. By extra])oIated contents of index registers and the poten- being able to get an accurate view of the status of tial value of address contents utilized by the code. Us- applications programming, these auditors will be in ing this algorithm, which has already been developed, a better position to measure the validity of figures we are on the verge of providing a most powerful tool which the company's computers provide. which can provide DP managers with an accurate, pe- In the limited amount of time made available to riodic audit of the functional status of their applica- me, I have tried to show how the consultant approach- tions and software. The mere availability of such a es complexities of computer software security on a powerful tool will serve to disuade the dishonest or pragmatic basis in response to pressing user require- adventurous programmer from attempting to imbed ments. By concentrating our attention on improve- within a legitimate application a self-serving subrou- ments in the testing of user created programs as well tine or to plant disruptive faults which may be trig- as the structuring and control of user technical docu- gered by chance events cognizable by the program, oc- mentation, we feel that we are taking a significant step curring months after he has left the installation or quit toward achieving an across-the-board improvement in the company. We hope that this type of system will existing computer system security. find significant use as an adjunct to the classical audit INFORMATION AND SECURITY MANAGEMENT Joseph F. Cunningham Executive Director, Association for Computing Machinery 1133 Avenue of the Americas, New York, N.Y. 10036 Good afternoon Ladies and Gentlemen. For many second priority went to Controlled Accessibility. These years, it was popular to say that "everyone talks about areas have no instant answers, only instant "experts." the weather but nobody does anything about it," a We are working hard on getting the answers and will saying with may no longer have the same significance be working on them for a long time. since the advent of the computer has permitted a bet- Let me give you a progress report as of March 1974. ter job of forecasting the weather so that we really In the Privacy area, the technologies are legal, so- know what is coming. To bring this analogy into the cial and political sciences. The issues are public policy. current arena, one might replace weather with privacy As many people, including the President, are saying, and security and indeed it seems there has been a lot the time has come for action rather than for more of conversation about it until finally the National Bu- studies. More than a year ago, NBS and ACM assem- reau of Standards has attempted to synthesize what has bled a planning group here in this building to explore been going on. the alternatives for action. The group was drawn from As you well know, the subject starts with attempting an exceptionally wide range of interests, and it rather to identify and define the term "privacy" and then the quickly agreed upon a structure for providing sound, rights associated with it. It passes on then to the dis- fundamentally accurate information to governmental, cussion of means for preserving these rights including private sector, and public interest agencies working on some rather exotic legal notions. If the legal actions policies with respect to Privacy. proposed so far have been exotic so too have many of This structure has been evolving into finished form the safeguards designed to assure the safety of com- through the eflorts of a sub-group composed of Alan puter based systems. One notices with amusement that Westin, David Martin of HEW, Walter Carlson repre- there does not seem to be an equal amount of effort senting ACM and NBS. directed towards protection of those systems which are In the area of Controlled Accessibility, the progress not computer based. has been more rapid. A planning group convened early Yesterday, Bob Rector outlined the broad dimen- in 1972 by NBS and ACM defined five segments of sions of professional responsibility for reacting to the technology of importance to data confidentiality and national issues of privacy and of computer security. data security. In December 197—2, about 70 of the Today, I would like to assure you that ACM has been country's —knowledgeable persons including some in reacting and acting. this room were brought together to state what they In cooperation with the National Bureau of Stand- could agree upon in each of the five segments as being ards and with financial assistance from the National sound, fundamentally accurate information. As the peo- Science Foundation, ACM has been assessing the tech- ple attending the November conference and this one nical fundamentals which support action programs in would know, the field is far easier to describe in terms several areas of national importance. It should be of of unknowns and uncertainties than it is in terms of interest that these eflforts have been underway since fundamental precents. The NBS staflP has been sifting late 1970. It should be of no surprise to this audience the kernels of lasting wisdom from the positions adopt- that highest priority was given to Privacy and that ed by the December 1972 attendees, and one of the 53products of this effort will be in the form of an Execu- and implications of proposed or actual legal remedies tive Guide to Computer Security that will contain in- and resolve how the technology can and must be ap- formation with respect to questions that top manage- plied from the systems point of view so that we may ment wants answered in organizations using computers. manage alertly. But I submit that much of the work accomplished And now let's go to the speakers who make up this to date, and more yet to be defined, can possibly all be panel. for naught if we do not learn the significance, terms RISK ANALYSIS IN PLANNING FOR PHYSICAL SECURITY Robert V. Jacobson Senior Security Group, Inc., 17 Battery Place, New York, N.Y. 10004 Too often reliance on rituals and amulets is substi- Loss, theft or misuse of assets controlled directly tuted for rational thought in developing security pro- or indirectly by the computer system can be costly grams. This is particularly risky when dealing with to the organization. It is helpful to think of three class- computer systems since potential losses may not always es of assets: be obvious. For example, if we keep $1 million dol- lars in our money vault, it is clear that the limit on • Physical assets of the computer system; computer our potential loss is $1 million dollars. But what about hardware, air conditioning and electric power a stolen reel of computer tape? The replacement cost equipment and other required units. Note that wil be about $15. It may have cost $50 in computer while the value of the contents of the typical office time to compile an engineering analysis program and will be in the range of $10 per square foot, the record it on the tape. The cost to write the program same value for a computer room might be as might exceed $50 thousand and the potential impact high as $2000. on profits might exceed $5 million if the program fell • The system "software"; programs, data files, doc- into the hands of a competitor. In short while the umentation and other simiar items particular to cost of the stolen item might be only a few dollars, the the computer system. These assets can be costly i lim op na sct ofo dn olt lh ae rs.or Aga nn diza tt hi ero en im sig nh ot wb ae ym te oas teu lr le td hein vam li ul e- t fo orr te hc eo fn tst or ruc mt ayif hlo as vt, e m spa ey ciab le pra it vtr aa cc yti cv oe nst ia dr eg re at -s of a computer system asset by direct inspection. tions. The first step in the rational approach to security • Money, negotiable instruments, goods and serv- planning is to define computer system security as two ices may all be controlled by a computer system specific performance parameters: with the result that it offers a potential route for • protection against losses caused by delays in com- fraud or theft. pleting assigned data processing tasks, and It is important to review the computer system as a • protection of assets against loss, theft or misuse. whole to assess properly the value of the physical as- sets and then to review each of the assigned tasks to Every data processing task has some time constraint establish the value of each of the associated programs on its completion. If an accident, sabotage, power fail- and data files and to evaluate the potential for fraud ure or other mishap delays processing, the organization or theft of other assets via the computer system. Then suffers a loss. Generally speaking, the longer the delay just as was the case with delay losses, we must deter- the greater will be the loss. Of course, some data proc- mine what events might lead to losses, the amount of essing tasks are much more time urgent than others. theloss and the probability of occurrencefor each such But if no loss results from a delay, then the task need event. These estimates will lead, finally, to an annual- never be done. The sum of the losses estimated for ized loss expectancy estimate for each of the three all the tasks assigned to a computer system provides a classes of assets. sm ue ltan fs rof mor deg la au ysg .ing quantitatively the losses which re- theWh ee xpn ecw tee dha lov se sec som fp rl oe mte dd elt ah ye es de t pw ro ocee ss st iim na gte as nd. . t. he. To complete the picture, we must determine what expected asset losses .... we can see clearly which are events could cause delays and for each such event the significant threats and which parts of our computer type we must estimate the probability of its occurrence, system have the greatest potential for loss. This yields perhaps on an annual basis, and the mean duration of several powerful advantages in developing the physical the resulting delay. Using these two estimates and our security program: estimates of potential losses, we can estimate the ex- pected losses from delays on an annual basis for each • Security measures can be focused on the areas of type of damaging event. greatest need. 54• The estimated loss expectancy provides a gauge • Finally, the security audit program will have for determining a reasonable level of expenditure greater value since it can draw on the risk analy- for protective measures. sis to identify the areas which require the most attention. • The relationship between physical security mea- sures and other aspects of the security program is In summary, the key point is this: Unlike the typical clearer and fund allocation can be made more risk situation where the value of the potential loss is effectively. usually selfevident, the loss potential associated with a computer system can only be determined through a • A policy statement for the computer security pro- systematic and comprehensive quantitative assessment gram can be constructed with some precision to of the risk. Guesswork at the very least will lead to address the true security needsof the organization. misuse of available security funding and in the worst case might expose the organization to disaster. SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS IN INFORMATION SYSTEM DESIGN* Steven B. Lipner MITRE Corporation, Bedford, Massachusetts 01730 Introduction Balanced Security This paper presents a brief discussion of security In designing an information system that handles considerations in the design ofcomputer-based informa- sensitive information, considerations of threat and vul- tion systems. The objective of the paper is not to pro- nerability are basic. In this context, the concept of vide a complete technical discussion of each issue threat refers to the willingness or intent of a hostile raised, but rather to present the reader with an over- agent to access the information. Vulnerability refers view of such issues and to motivate the consideration to characteristics of the system itself that allow such of these issues in the design of information systems access to take place. Consideration of accidental dam- that must handle sensitive information. age or access is also required, but can be handled One major point that wil be made by this paper is by relatively straightforward thorough practice and that the handling of security in a computer-based in- seems fundamentally different from the consideration formation system is at best a difficult problem. How- of hostility and malice. ever, deferring consideration of security issues has In considering threat and vulnerability, the designer never been shown to be a viable way of handling the would do well to keep in mind that a rational opponent problem. Security problems that could have been re- will attack a system's weakest point. Thus, providing solved by an early design decision have a way of re- great protection at one point of potential vulnerability turning to haunt the designer who ignores them. The may only drive a hostile agent to attack another point designer is best served by addressing security as he of vulnerability slightly less weak than the first. Only designs the system, building security measures into his if th—e entire system is protected to —about the same ex- design, and attempting to revise requirements to elimi- tent if the protection is balanced can the designer nate those problems he cannot solve. Waiting "until claim to have expended his protection resources in a later" to address security seems almost to guarantee reasonable manner. the presence of one or more problems that cannot be The appropriate measure for th—e level of system pro- solved within the existing design and whose solution tection is the hostile agent's cost not the designer's. is expected by the ultimate users of the system. The next section of this paper discusses the history of This paper begins with a brief discussion of the secure operating system design efforts in which design- problem of balance in providing security for informa- ers have expended tens of man-years "protecting'" sys- tion systems. Next comes a more specific discussion of tems only to find that their efforts could be undone by the problem of protection in computer and operating a hostile effort of a few man-months. In such cases, system software. The third section discusses what can designers have presumably assumed that the effort to be characterized as partial software protection meas- defeat their protective measures would be roughly pro- ures, and the fourth describes principles for achieving portional to the effort required to implement them. complete software protection. Such assumptions, while comforting, are not a priori valid. *The work reported herein was sponsored by the Air Force Elec- The requirement for balanced protection is, of t 6r 7o 2n Ri .c Systems Division under Contract F19628-73-C-0001, Project course, system-wide. Some systems using remote termi- 55nals have implemented elaborate password and user those programs exploit. Short of constructing the (as- identification schemes but ignored the requirement for tronomically large) set of all possible penetration pro- protection of communication lines. For some classes of grams, one can make no statement at all about im- threat, such designs are perfectly reasonable. But the discovered holes or the penetration programs that designer of such a system who asserts that his system would exploit them. This problem is compounded at is secure because it would take thirty-eight hours (or the practical level by the fact that complex and expen- days or years) to break the password system and who sive program modifications, intended to patch existing ignores the possibility of achieving the same end with operating system holes, have themselves a significant a wiretap and ten minutes' effort does himself and his likelihood of introducting new holes in previously audience a disservice. A realistic assessment of system- sound areas. wide vulnerability is required, and this assessment is Theproblem of completeness, as stated above, might seldom identical with an assessment of the vulnerability lead the reader to rebel and proclaim that complete- of the last-designed security feature. ness is not ne—cessary, that nowhere else is perfect secu- It is the concept of balanced protection that motivates rity required that physical, personnel and even com- dedicating much of the remainder of this paper to soft- munications security measures have finite probabilities ware and operating system protection and vulnerabil- of penetration. One might then say that in a computer ity. As users, managers and designers become aware of it should be similarly possible to accept a degree of exposures in such areas as communications, personnel, security less than a hundred percent. Unfortunately, and procedures, it appears likely that they will imple- the usual analogy between operating system security ment protection in these areas and drive hostile efforts problems and those of physical, personnel or commu- toward the weaknesses of the operating system soft- nications systems is not a correct one. If an error in ware. an operating system program allows a penetration pro- gram to wo —rk, that program will work every time it The Problem of Software Security is executed typically retrieving without detection any information accessible to the computer. The probability The basic problem of security and protection in of a successful penetration is then unity; the level of today's computer systems is that any program that runs security zero per cent. The likelihood that a hostile on a computer can assess any information physicaly agent will write the penetration program is, therefore, accessible to the processor, and can retrieve, alter or the only uncertainty. This likelihood is hard to assess, destroy the information as the programmer wishes. since it depends on the motivation and competence of While the statement above may appear to be a radical the agent. However, experience with penetration tests one, it is amply supported by facts and experience. On leads to th conclusion that the penetrator's changes of numerous occasions, programmers have conducted for- success are very high. Although concealing the struc- mal or informal projects aimed at te—sting the security ture and weaknesses of the operating system modifica- of operating systems by penetration by writing pro- tions may seem to obscure the structure andweaknesses grams that obtain access to information without au- of the security controls, such a primitive encoding thorization. The author has participated directly in scheme does not effectively deter penetration ; knowl- several of these penetration projects and observed the edge of the basic processor hardware and standard results of others. In each case, the result has been total operating system provides an adequate starting point success for the penetrators. The programmers involved for the penetrator's efforts. in these efforts have not been "insiders" but simply A final point about the vulnerability of current com- competent system programmers armed with user and puter systems concerns the cost of penetration. Most (sometimes) system level documentation for the com- penetration efforts have been completed successfully puter and operating system under test. with very few (perhaps two) man-months of effort. Given experience in the penetration of computer Typically, the bulk —of the effort expended is directed systems, one might ask "why not simply modify the toward exploitation finding information to be re- operating system programs to correct those flaws that trieved and building programs to retrieve it. Develop- allow the penetration to succeed?" There are two prob- ment of the basic approaches that assure successful lems that preclude this approach (often referred to as penetration has usualy required only a man-week or "patching holes") from being effective. The first, a two. In comparison, the effort expended in patching practical problem, is that in many cases operating sys- operating system holes is rumored (most agencies that tem or application programs will not work if a hole have performed such patches are reluctant to report is patched. Thus, correcting a security flaw may render costs) to be in the tens or hundreds of man-months. the computer system inoperative unless a long, costly This brief overview of the technical problem of soft- series of program modifications is made. The second ware and operating system security is not intended to problem, a fundamental one in the field of multilevel portray the problem as a hopeless one. Rather, the sec- computer security, is thatofcompleteness. Even if every tion has been written to indicate the nature of the hole that allowed a known penetration approach to problem and its position in a consideration of balanced work were repaired, one still could not consider the re- security measures and threats. The next two sections sulting operating system secure because a given collec- discuss partial and complete measures for addressing tion of penetration programs exposes only theholes that software security problems. 56Partial Measures for Software Security chance in return for compactness of representation. The protection associated with file passwords merely intro- Designers of information systems that must face duce an element of chance in return for compactness security problems are often interested in partial meas- of representation. The protection associated with file ures that can be introduced at low cost to provide passwords i—s that of the operating system that imple- limited protection. The true limits of such measures ments them few indeed are the penetrators who have should be painfuly evident from a reading of the sec- forced to guessat file passwords. tion above,,for none has any effect on the ability of a programmer to construct penetrations of the sort dis- External Security Computers cussed there or the cost ofdoing so. A number of proposals have been made for the use Auditing of external minicomputers to perform a security con- trol function for a large computer system. The key As various computer-related crimes have touched the issue in evaluating such a configuration is the role of financial community, interest in computer auditing has the minicomputer. If it provides all of the security increased significantly. Auditing is an approach to controls such a minicomputer can solve the problem detecting an irresponsible action within the "rules" of a of completeness and implement an effective security system. It will detect a bank teller who, using an on- system [1, 2].' line transaction system, makes a "withdrawal" from a If the external minicomputer merely observes the customer's account. Similarly, in a time-sharing sys- actions of the main computer to watch for improper tem, auditing can detect an attempt by a user (success- actions, or if it shares the role of security controller ful or not) to log in using another user's password. with the main computer, it can easily be fooled or by- But auditing cannot detect actions by the agent who passed by a hostile agent's program on the main does not follow the rules of either system. In the first processor. In this case, of course, the external mini- case, a programmer can add his own unaudited trans- computer does not provide effective controls and is of atcion type to alter balances within the bank's master little or no value. files; in the second, the time-sharing user can log in using his own identity, then constructs a program to Complete Software Protection Measures access files owned by any other user without using that user's password. The computer system designer who requires effec- In a system without complete and effective access tive protection, and who cannot "lock his system up" controls, auditing is of no help in detecting either to depend on physical security, procedures, and trusted programmed attack; in a system with such controls it people requires an effective software security control is not necessary, for the attacks wil fail. A system system. The following paragraphs describe briefly the equipped with access controls does require auditing evolution and basis ofsuch systems. to detect irresponsible actions by authorized individ- uals. The teller who "plays around" with accounts he The Computer Security Technology Panel can legally access or the user who gives away his pass- word will leave detectable traces in a system with In 1970, the Air Force Electronics Systems Division access controls as wel as auditing. However, the value (ESD) was asked by the Air Force Data Services Cen- of auditing is indeed limited. ter (AFDSC) to support the development of secure operation for AFDSC's Honeywell 635 computer sys- Passwords tems. The 635s operate under control of the standard GCOS HI operating system. After a relatively brief Passwords provide a mechanism for assuring that period, ESD and MITRE personnel pursuing the de- an individual is, with a given probability, who he tells velopment reached conclusions substantia—lly identical the password processing mechanism he is. For this pur- to those reported in the previous section that no set pose, they are an appropriate tool. But almost all of of modifications to GCOS III would render it suitable the numerous programmers who have penetrated time- for secure operation. sharing systems logged in with passwords and then In an attempt to determine the reasons for the diffi- ignored completely the password assigned to the users culty with GCOS HI and to identify ways of solving whose files they stole or altered. Passwords are only future computer security problems, ESD convened in an identification mechanism; they provide no internal early 1972, a computer security technology planning protection. study panel. The panel operated under a contract from The use of file passwords in some computer systems ESD to James P. Anderson and Company and was may seem to contradict the statement above. In fact, tasked to prepare a development plan representing a however, such passwords merely provide a shorthand coherent approach to attacking the problems of multi- for a list naming those individuals authorized to access level computer security. The panel's report  iden- the file. The price for that shorthand is that a list is tified the problem of completeness and recognized the complete and closed (one is on the list, or he is not) while the password is open (anyone can guess it). Thus file passwords merely introduce an element of of1 tF hi ig sur pe as pei rn . brackets indicate the literature references at the end 57: ; — futility of "patching holes" in existing operating sys- c. Certifiability the reference monitor must be tems. The technical approach recommended by the small, simple and understandable so that it can panel was "to start with a statement of an ideal system, be tested and verified to perform its functions a model, and to refine and move the statement through properly. various levels of design into the mechanisms that im- plement the model system" . The following sub- Both the requirement for completeness and that for section discusses the characteristics of the "ideal sys- certifiability demand that the—reference monitor include tem" as proposed by the panel and detailed by subse- hardware as well as software the former because soft- quent efforts. ware validation of every access by a subject to an object would add intolerable complexity and overhead The Reference Monitor to the reference monitor, the latter because certain hardware architectures preclude the construction of a The basic component of the ideal system proposed simple understandable operating system. The software by —the security technology panel is the reference moni- portion of the reference monitor has been called the tor a hardware-software mechanism that controls the "security kernel." access of subjects (active system elements) to objects Recognizing the importance to achieving computer (units of information) within the computer system. security of the ideal model of a reference monitor, Figure 1 presents a schematic diagram of the relation ESD initiated the development of a mathematical model among subjects, objects, reference monitor, and refer- of computer security. Preliminary efforts were per- ence monitor authorization data base. The figure gives formed at ESD  and the initial model development examples of typical subjects, objects, and data base was completed by the MITRE Corporation. A later modeling effort using an alternate approach has been items. pursued in parallel with the MITRE work by Case Western Reserve University . The MITRE model  represents a secure computer system as a finite-state mechanism that makes explicit transitions from one security state to the next. The model specifies rules that define formally the conditions under which a transition from state to state may occur. The rules are proven to allow only transitions that A preserve the security of information in the system. significant property of the model is that all but trusted programs are restricted from writing information less sensitive than they read. The restriction prevents in- formation obtained at the higher level of sensitivity from being transferred to a lower level where it can be accessed illegally. This property eliminates the need REFERENCE MONITOR DATA BASE to certify that all programs such as editors and utility USER ACCESS, OBJECT routines do not act as "Trojan Horses"  and down- SENSITIVITY,NEED-TO-KNOW,.... grade classified information. The finite-state model specifies the secure operation of a system composed of subjects and objects. A secu- rity kernel must implement representations of both the rules of the model and the subjects and objects these rules control. The implementation of subjects and ob- Figure 1. Reference Monitor. jects is constrained by the hardware on which the kernel operates. If the hardware does not facilitate the In operation, the reference monitor allows or forbids simple implementation of subjects and objects, the access by subjects to objects, making its decisions on third of the panel's requirements for a reference moni- the basis of subject identity, object identity, and secu- tor will not be met. The panel recognized this fact and rity parameters of the subject and object. The refer- recommended for secure computer systems the use of ence monitor both mechanizes the desired access rules descriptor-driven ^ processors thatimplement segmented and assures that they are enforced within the computer. memories. With such processors, the objects of the The security technology panel stated that a reference model can correspond to the segments supported by monitor must meet the following three requirements thehardware. A properly organized segmented memory in order to provide the basis for a secure computer merges primary (core) and secondary storage manage- system ment functions, eliminating from security consideration — a. Completeness the reference monitor must be in- voked on every access by a subject to an object; -A descriptor-driven processor is one whose hardware interprets — each "virtual" address issued by a program in terms of a set of b. Isolation the reference monitor and itsdata base d ace cs ec sr sipt mo or ds estha (et .g.s ,pe rc ei af dy , wt rh ie te,re ea xl ecp uh ty es )ic ta ol ba edd ar se ss ocs iaa ten dd wip ter hmi et vt ee rd y must be protected from unauthorized alteration possible "virtual" address. 58any separate, complex, and security-related "file sys- required to provide a segmented memory and at least tem." Further, the subjects of the model correspond three processor domains. The above discussion has not to processes (address space-processor state pairs) sup- been explicit about the transition from the model to ported director by a descriptor-driven processor. programs that implement a kernel on .specific hard- The security kernel defined by the model and im- ware. A discussion of that transition is included in . plemented on descriptor-driven hardware is a simple software mechanism that implements only the security Summary rules, subjects, and objects. It does not provide the full facilities of an operating system; it could not do so This paper has discussed some of the security con- without developing so much complexity that it would siderations involved in designing a computer-based no longer be a security kernel. Instead, the complex information system. It has emphasized the software functions required of an operating system are provided problems presented by such systems, mainly for the by programs external to and controlled by the kernel. reasons that the costs of effecting a software penetra- These functions can be arbitrarily complex but are not tion are not great and that many designers seem un- security related. However, some may be sensitive in aware of the seriousness of software penetration terms of assuring the smooth operation ofthe computer problems. system. For example, a typical operating system (not kernel) function like a scheduling algorithm cannot References compromise information, but it can slow service to users.  Lipner, S. B., A Minicomputer Security Control System, To assure that user programs can be separated from MTP-151, The MITRE Corporation, Bedford, Massa- chusetts. g( ra an md s,ke tp ht ef Mr Iom TRi Ente dr efe vr ei ln og pmw ei nt th) efs fou rc th s s ie nns mi ut li tv ie -lp er vo e- l  Bi psb re oy a, chR. t, o I OI, pera an td inP gop Se yk s, teG m. SJ. e, cuE rn itc ya ,ps Uul Sa Ct /i Io nn f: orA mn atiA op n- security have identified the need for hardware with at Sciences Institute, Marina del Ray, California, October least three separate domains of execution (states of 1973. program privilege). Of these, one dan be allocated to  An nd ie nr gson S, tudJ ya ,me Js amP. e, sC Po .mp Au nt de er rsS oe ncur ai nty dT Ce oc mh pn aol no yg ,y EP Sla Dn -- th kernel, the second to the operating system, and the TR-73-51, Vol. I, Fort Washington, Pennsylvania. third to user programs. The kernel can easily protect  Ibid, pp. iv. the operating system from user programs and, because  Schell, R., Downey, P., Popek, G., Preliminary Notes on the Design of a Secure Military Computer System, of the organization of the hardware, the transitions MCI-73-1, January 1973, USAF Electronic Systems from one domain to another can be rapid and efficient. Division, L. G. Hanscom Field, Bedford, Massachusetts. In summary, this subsection has identified the con-  Walter, K. G., et al.. Primitive Models for Computer cepts of a security kernel and discussed a model of a Security, ESD-TR-74—117, Case Western Reserve Uni- kernel that represents the secure operation of an ideal  Belv le ,rsi Dt .y, , C al ne dvel La and P, adO uh li ao ,, J L.a ,nua Sr ecy ur19 e74 C. omputer Systems, reference monitor. It has also mentioned the require- ESD-TR-73-278, Vol. I, II, III, The MITRE Corpora- ment that the kernel implement subjects and objects, tion, Bedford, Massachusetts. and pointed out that their simple implementation  Branstad, D., Privacy and protection in operating systems, hinges on the architecture of the computer that the  ESC Domp 1u 9t 7e 3r, CV o. mp6 u, tN eo r. 1 S, ecJ ua rn iu ta yry De1 v9 e7 l3 o. pments, MCI-74-1, kernel controls. In particular, a secure computer is January 1974, USAF Electronic Systems Division, L. G. Hanscom Field, Bedford, Massachusetts. AUDITING CURRENT SYSTEMS Donn B. Parker Stanford Research Institute, Menlo Park, California 94025 To provide an idea or a sample of the kind of actions environments that computer technolog}" creates. Un- that must be taken to develop an accepted practices fortunately, computer technology has developed for the approach to this important aspect of computer security most part with the assumption of benign environments and privacy, I will discuss some of the problems con- rather than the hostile environments actually emerging cerning the safety of our organizations that are dedi- as proliferation of computers into sensitive social, cated to the use of computers. From the point of view government, and business functions continues. Of of the auditing function, I will indicate what the prob- course, we are referring to the same old errors, omis- lems are, what the state of the art is in EDP auditing, sions, floods, fires, explosions, frauds, thefts, extortions, and some of the specific problems and solutions. vandalisms, larceny, and compromises of personal We find that unintentional acts, failures that result rights that have always occurred. How^ever not only in losses, white-collar crime, and other abuses have automation in the environments, but also the occupa- always occurred in manual systems and environments tions of people causing and perpetrating such infrac- in organizations. Computer technology, however, is tions have changed. The methods, processes, and time automating the previous manual systems and taking scales by which they occur have changed; the forms over these environments. Therefore, if losses are to of assets and losses, the rates of incidence, and size of continue, they must continue in the new systems and losses have changed with advancing computer tech- 59nology. This is confounding the victims, the preventors, security and then monitor and report on the perform- the detectors, the recoverers, the regulators, and the ance; they normally report to a high enough level to lawmakers. The basic kinds of problems facing organi- be independent from the line functions they audit. In zations are essentially the same, but the methods and the future, the term EDP audit will probably become the environment have created a very new problem. As obsolete because all auditors will essentially become advancing computertechnology accelerates this change, EDP-oriented, but their organizations will have special- the elements necessary to preserve order, safety, and ists in the various subject areas that I have identified. the welfare of people and organizations lag behind. Auditing methods in advanced EDP environments Our initial studies of actual experience validate such are in a state of confusion. They have been developed trends. Almost 200 cases of reported computer abuse on an ad hoc basis and are unrelated from organiza- are recorded. Some of these cases were verified and a tion to organization, with no unifying technology be- few of them were investigated in depth; for the first yond dealing with the most rudimentary batch-operated time they provided more than just theoretical or pre- systems. In fact, a considerable lack of awareness exists sumptive evidence of this situation. These cases were among many auditors as to the vulnerabilities con- discovered mostly by accident rather than with pur- cerned with computers. An auditor today generally be- poseful methods. lieves that he can remove his audit program on Now the solutions and the control of these problems punched cards from his locked drawer, take it to the concern the safe operation of organizations. Tradition- computer room, observe it reading into the computer, ally, this is a concern of auditors; moreover, it is im- observe the source files on tape or disk being mounted, portant to continue to include the auditors in any at- watch the lights blink and the report come out of the tempts at solution and control. The solutions to the printer and be confident that his program is correct. It problems identified are coming from legislative action, was correctly run, and it produced correct output. He from the theoretical and empirical research, and from is unaware that the systems programmers, operators, the development activities being documented in this or maintenance engineers could have deceived him conference. In addition, one of the major areas of solu- without his knowledge. Not generally realized, however, tion and control activities must be auditing. is that today the best an auditor can do is contain or Heretofore, auditing has been associated with ac- isolate the problem area. Unfortunately, he usually is counting activities. Auditing however is m —ore broadly unaware that the problem exists, and lacks know-how defined as the left arm of management it ensures to control it. Historically, the auditor has handled visi- compliance with all policy integrity and correctness of ble records and processes. In the computer environ- business records. At this time as computers take over ment, he must accept on faith from the programmers, the environments of traditional auditing new demands operators, and engineers that the computer is storing, are placed on auditing functions. For example, the controlling, and processing data correctly within the Institute of Internal Auditors, the American Institute system. This violates basic concepts of auditing. of Certified Public Accountants, the National Associ- To solve these problems, we must develop and docu- ation of Accounting, other groups such as the EDP ment accepted good practices for auditors in EDP en- Auditors Association, and government bodies such as vironments. Let me provide examples of some of the various state insurance commissions are striving to specific problems and solutions to these problems and develop new methods in auditing to match the advance- thereby indicate the range and nature of the practices ment of the systems that they must audit. that must be established. A new specialization currently called EDP auditing In one computer abuse case that we investigated, a has emerged in the last several years. Banks have prob- programmer allegedly embezzled through a computer ably led the way in this specialty. Several large banks even though a record of the act was also produced in have a ratio of one EDP auditor for every ten to thirty the exception reports. He relied on the fact that no programmers; some large lianks have as many as sixty one bothered to look at the voluminous exception re- to one hundred EDP auditors. The EDP auditors' porting output listings. He was successful in his em- charters are expanding to include accountability for bezzlement primarily because he was able to hide his computer-resource usage and data access. This was act in this fashion. Humans should not be expected to indicated in the proceedingsof the first conference here look at voluminous exception reports produced daily at the National Bureau of Standards. The diverse func- by computers; rather, this is a job ideally suited for tions now required of auditors in EDP environments computers to reduce the voluminous data to a possible necessitate further specialization for in-depth penetra- one page analysis. tion into all aspects of protecting organizations in EDP Consider another aspect of the problem that is often environments. The specific areas of sp—ecialty include overlooked. Vulnerability is the highest at times when physical security, —operational security including re- irregular operations in a computing facility may be covery and backup application analysis and program- caused by various failures, unusual work loads, or ming, systems programming, and electronic engineer- system changes. I have documented several cases of ing. This implies ateam approach to auditing to achieve computer abuse that have occurred at these most vul- the necessary depth of expertise in these diverse areas. nerable times. Extraordinary operational procedures We find organizationally that the line functions imple- should be established in advance and should be prac- ment and operate security activities and controls. ticed to facilitate operation during these periodsof high Whereas auditors establish the criteria for controls and vulnerability when suspicion of possible damaging 60activities is high. For example, a common practice is by the computer operations department. For example, to store only one copy of sensitive files and programs auditors can see the common situations where expen- in remote backup facilities. After an emergency occurs sive man-traps are installed to control physical access, and the backup facilities have been used, these files are but the operators on second .shift prop the emergency returned to the computing facility. The computing exit door open with a box of cards because it is the facility is now in an even more vulnerable position most direct route to the coffee machine. Or consider the because the remotely stored backup has been removed, cases where extensive programming is done to provide and the only copies of the sensiti—ve files and programs secure access control to commercial timesharing sys- are now in the computing center which is in its most tems even though a known bug that allows free access vulnerable state. One possible, obvious solution is to to the entire system still exists in the Fortran compiler. remotely store two copies of sensitive files and pro- In one particular case, even though one customer was grams and to have auditor verification that they are caught penetrating the system in this fashion, the updated and useful. These periods of extraordinary reason the bug remained unfixed was that no other activities also have a positive aspect. Acts or events customers had ever been found using that method of resulting in losses are sometimes discovered during penetration. unusual operational periods that would not have been Again, consistency is the key to the most effective discovered otherwise. Several cases that I have docu- application of resources to security. Auditors should mented support this. Therefore, change or extraordi- ensure that the simple, inexpensive, but effective secu- nary operational conditions properly controlled can be rity measures should be taken before they worry about an effective detection mechanism. more elaborate measures to protect other, but equally Turning to another area of application program vulnerable situations. I have several documented cases controls, we find that data validation is usually per- that illustrate this point. For example, very few organi- formed in application programs at the point in time zations take the trouble to label their programs to iden- when data are entered into the system. A suggestion tify the ownership. This requires a very small expendi- has been made that this should be changed so that the ture of effort and resources, yet has a very valuable general rule would indicate that validation should be effect in programmers attitudes towards the ownership performed within the computer in proximity to the of the programs they produce and has an added value time—and place of use or before a process-termination where programs are involved in matters of litigation. test whichever occurs first. In another example, we find that timesharing systems houF ro sr e ix npa um tple t, o e px at yr ra olp lrot ae pc pt li io cn atii os nsaff io frd te hd e fo ir n-rl aa nb go er or rare "ly DOprov Ni Ode Tth Ee Ne Tqu Ei Rv "ale sn it gno sf " wN itO hiT nRE thS eP irAS sS ysI tN emG s" . Therefore, the users of these systems are given no rules validation is performed in the pay calculation process r cia at lh le yr tt rh ua en indu ar nin ig nti en gp ru at tet do st yhe stc eo mmp wu ht ee rr e. mT ahi ns yis ope ps op re -- c ho an vc eer an chi in eg vet dhe lek gi in td is mao tf e aac ct ci ev si sti te os tp ie mr em si ht at re id ngon sc ye stt eh mse .y tunities could exist for programmed, unauthorized As another example, I find that very few employees in data processing organizations understand the extent of alteration between these processes. the trust placed in theim and their security responsi- Auditing also has a role to play in expected new bilities. I suggest that this situation can be improved laws to come from the current privacy legislation considerably by a requirement that all EDP employees activities. in sensitive positions read a document explaining their Detection and monitoring of noncompliance with trusts and responsibilities and sign a statement that privacy and security practice and policy in computer they have read these regulations at least once each systems will be the auditors responsibility. This is an year. important constraint on how security is designed and Auditing includes assurance that emergency meas- implemented. The basic elements found in most of this ures work by conducting tests. In one case, the under legislation consist of defining information jurisdictions, floor CO2 fire extinguishing system had never been regulation, licensing or registration, sanctions, full dis- tested, but it was activated once by accident. It was closure, due process, and protection of information. then found that because the CO2 was heavier than air, Assurance of compliance with these anticipated laws it leaked down to the floor below and almost killed falls within the responsibility of auditors within organi- several employees there. This is another example of zations affected by the laws. Surely, the auditors should the continuing need for broad examination of security be consulted concerning their ability to prove compli- measures and the testing of these measures by an in- ance with the full disclosure, due process, and protec- dependent organization, either internal to the organi- tion elements and to determine the definition of ade- zation or by external consulting services. The ultimate quate protection in their organizational contexts. goal of security and protection of confidentiality is to Since auditors are removed from the line functions reduce to a minimum the number of people in whom of the designers, implementers, and operators of secu- we must put complete trust and faith. The auditors rity functions, they can examine and judge the consist- have traditionally been these people in our organiza- ency of measures taken and the consistency of resources tions. Efforts towards security in computer systems and expended for security. They can observe that physical environments should continue this tradition. \^e must security measures implemented by the security depart- not forget the auditing functions in the development ment are consistent with the security measures adopted or privacy and security in computer systems. 61OPEN FORUM REMARKS THE MEDICAL PATIENT'S RIGHT TO PRIVACY Lois A. Bowden American Hospital Association, 840 North Lake Shore Drive, Chicago, Illinois 60611 Within the broad spectrum of records that are main- "The patient has the right to expect that all communications tained on individuals, the medical record is unique and and records pertaining to his care should be treated as con- fidential." its special characteristics require our thoughtful con- sideration. The American Hospital Association has long recognized these special characteristics and require- Traditionally the patient's right to privacy has been ments for protection of the patient's right to privacy. protected through the use of his written authorization. The primary purpose of the medical record is to Technically the patient's written consent governs the document the course of the patient's illness and treat- release of information concerning his illness. Realis- ment. As such, it serves as a basis for the planning tically the various previously-mentioned pressures for and evaluation of individual patient care and for com- such release have diminished the significance of writ- munication between the physician and other profes- ten consents. sionals contributing to the patient's care. And although In view of this tradition and of new developments medicolegal applications, research, teaching, data col- affecting the use of medical records, the Association's lection, and validation of insurance claims are extreme- Board of Trustees voted in November 1972 to request ly important uses of the medical record, they are that a thorough exploration of the problem of confi- secondary. dentiality of patient records in light of recent legis- As the hospital medical record is being subjected to lative enactments concerning federal health care pro- greater demands for its use and for the release of grams be undertaken. medical information, it is becoming increasingly diffi- In response to this charge and in light of the recom- cult to maintain the confidentiality of patient informa- mentadions on safeguard requirements for administra- tion. Financial, legal, adminstratve. educational, re- tive personal data systems, outlined in Records, Com- search, and audit requirements are factors that con- puters and the Rights of Citizens, the American Hos- tribute to the complexity of preserving confidentiality; pital Association's Committee on Medical Records has and the original concept of the medical record as a undertaken to examine the appropriate definition, tool with which the practitioner manages patient care specifications, and limitations for a pro—perly executed often is lost in proposals for the acquisition of patient authorization for release of information so as to pro- data for nonpatient-care usage. vide the right information to the right person at the In releasing information from patient records, the right time. many questions that arise that are not covered by stat- In addition, this committee has expressed grave con- ute, court decision, or regulation are determined by cerns with regard to the unknown and unauthorized hospital policy and the judgment exercised thereunder. secondary release of medical information by persons Therefore, the Association has provided guidelines and and organizations, both public and private. general principles for information disclosure. This committee would appeal that legislation created Recent A.ssociation publications include the manual. in the interest of third parly payment and other secon- Hospital Medical Records: Guidelines for Their Use dary uses of the record, also provide for the patient's and Release of Medical Information (published in right to privacy, thereby encouraging the use of medi- 1972). the Statement Against the Use of the Social cal information that is not personally identifiable Security Number for Patient Identification (1973) , and wherever possible. the Statement on Health Data Systems (1973). In fur- It is the sincere hope of the American Hospital As- ther recogniton of the special characteristics and re- sociation that all of these activities and those of others quirements of the patient's medical record as it affects concerned with security of information systems will the patient's rights of privacy, the American Hospital lead us to a workable solution of these problems and Association included within its Statement on a Patient's concerns that will satisfy the legitimate need for medi- Bill of Rights (adopted February 1973) the following: cal information, while protecting the rights of confi- "The patient has tlie right to every consideration of his dentiality of the patients served and preserving the in- privacy concerning his own medical care program. Case dis- tegrity of the patient's medical record to adequately cussions, consultation, examination, and treatment are con- fulfill its primary function: the documentation of pa- fidential and should he conducted discreetly. Those not di- tient care and treatment. rectly involved in his care must have the permission of the patient to be present. 62OPEN FORUM REMARKS CONFIDENTIALITY OF THE MEDICAL RECORD Margaret C. Beard American Medical Record Association, 875 N. Michigan Ave., Chicago, Illinois 60611 Economic and social issues, together with technologi- recognizes the need for patient health information in cal advances, have resulted in an erosion of the confi- providing a sound basis both for substantiating claims dential relationship traditionally existing between pa- and for conducting medical care evaluation. Through tient and health care professional. The proliferation of this statement, however, AMRA reaffirms the patient's health insurance programs has been accompanied by right to privacy in relation to his medical record. While an ever increasing number of requests for information the patient does not have the property right to his from patient health records in substantiating claims record, he does have the protected right of information. for payment. At the same time, a growing emphasis on Therefore, subject to applicable legal provisions, re- accountability has resulted in further demands for lease of any individually-identifiable medical informa- patient health information for medical care evaluation, tion for any purpose other than patient care must be including utilization review, which has caused a tre- done only with the express informed authorization of mendous growth in the number of automated data the patient or his legal agent. storage and retieval systems for information manage- With respect to this right of privacy, AMRA en- ment. dorses the development of legislative and regulatory The primary purpose of the medical record is to activities to: (1) protect the patient from invasion of document the course of the patient's health care and to privacy as a result of indiscriminate and unauthorized provide a medium of communication among direct care access to confidential health information and (2) as- professionals for current and future patient care. Un- sure appropriate usage of medical information once it less the patient can feel assured that the highly sensitive is disseminated by authorized persons. and personal information he shares with health care Further. AMRA recommends greater emphasis on. professionals will remain confidential, he may withhold the patient's right to privacy by health care institutions information critical to his treatment, thereby diminish- throuhg the establishment of written policies for the ing the quality of the care provided him. release of informaiton, together with active educational The American Medical Record Association (AMRA) programs for all staff personnel to enforce these policies. OPEN FORUM REMARKS MODEL LEGISLATION Brian Backus Ohio Department of Administrative Services 30 East Broad Street, Columbus, Ohio 43215 As day-to-day guardians of large volumes of per- done for the SAFE (Secure and Automated Facility sonalized information both in automated and manual Environment) in the State of Illinois. The fruits of this systems, we in state and local government feel that a effort are now being realized. It is model legislation great measure of responsibility for the protection of for state governments covering the regulation of per- this kind of information rests with us. As operators of sonal information in the possession of the states. With government information centers we believe that we this document we believe that we have come a long stand in a position where we can be useful in the way towards a practical means of dealing with the design and implementation of procedures for the pro- problems of privacy and towards protection of the in- tection of the privacy of personal information. dividual. We have also addressed the management and To this end, two organizations representing all 50 regulatory needs of government data centers. states and many municipal governments have been The significant features of this legislation are: studying the problem of legislation in this area. They 1. It regulates any personal data, not just data in are NASIS (National Association of State Information automated systems. It applies only to data in the pos- Systems and G-MIS (Government Management Infor- session of state and local governments, but can be mation Sciences). Their work was based on research expanded to cover the private sector as well. 632. It defines the individual's rights to be protected: 3. It createsa regulatory body, an Information Prac- a. the individual can request and be notified if tices Board with a staff.The duties of the Board include a file contains personal information about him. the promulgation of administrative regulation for or- In most cases, he can see the contents of such ganizations which own personal data to insure security files. and confidentiality of data. The Board also would con- b. On his request inaccurate or incomplete data duct investigations of questions which arise concerning is to be corrected or amended. the law and regulations and lend flexibility in situa- c. T —he individual is to be free from: tions where strict adherence may not be merited. It uses of data outside the purposes of the would hear appeals on decisions regarding privacy by —system state and localagencies and data processing authorities. continued collection and storage of obsolete 4. It gives the Board the power to establish local —information boards to regulate data at that level. use of information whose accuracy cannot Those interested in obtaining a copy of the finished —be verified document may write to: coercion to give information about himself. G-MIS d. The individual has a right to know how in- 138 E. Court St. formation concerning himself is used. Cincinnati, Ohio 45202. OPEN FORUM REMARKS ON INFORMATION FILES AND PEOPLE Mark P. Kriger Harvard University, 520 Gund Hall, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138 To my knowledge at the present there are only two Thirdly, we might begin to look at an individual's universities in this nation which currently have courses personal space as being extended by and related to on the subject of "Privacy and Security in Computer his information space. Before the advent of large in- Systems." I want to thank you in helping me to plan formation files a person's private space was pretty teaching a course on this subject. The many conflicting much equivalent to his home and place of work. When and cooperative viewpoints represented here at this we increase the information available about a person conference have been most valuable. we increase what we might term his "information In the following few minutes I would like to share space," which is to say, that his personal identity in an with you several ideas which have not been mentioned information sense has been increased and even re- and which merit consideration. The first of these is the defined. notion of "information flashpoint." It is clear that the In closing. I would like to share with you the words advent of large-scale computer systems results in a of a Chinese sage named Lao Tse, who lived in fourth larger quantity of information available. However, as century B.C. China. In his "Treatise on Response and computer networks, and especially, information proc- Retribution," he wrote: essing utilities come of age there is a possibility of qualitative changes in the information as files become merged or easily accessible from a terminal. For ex- "If a man's heart be awakened to the good, though the good be not yet accomplished, good spirits are already following ample, when we bring together unclassified files con- him. taining codes and data and a simple algorithm for analysis it is often possible for that information then aIf cca omm pa ln i' ss hedh ,ear et vilbe spa iw ria tk se an re ed at lo ree avi dl y, ft oh lo lu og wh ine gvil hib me ."not yet to become classified in nature. A second item which computer scientists, managers, and public policymakerswould do well to guard against Translating this advice into the present computer woud be the growing trend of what might be termed age, this is to state that we have a need for men and "information pollution." If we do not take measures women of good intent in the design, maintenance, and to constantly eliminate what is not needed in files then updating of information files, manual or computerized. we will have information systems so cluttered with Let us remember that the information files which we meaningless or irrelevant data that the information are creating and maintaining are about real people which is required will be buried and less usable. In- whom we have in many cases not met and never will suring the clarity and accuracy of information is also meet. Nonetheless, we are continually defining and related to this notion of information pollution. extending the information space about these people. 64OPEN FORUM REMARKS THE NEED FOR PRIVACY LEGISLATION Robert H. Long Bank Administration Institute,^ P.O. Box 500, Park Ridge, Illinois 60068 I have heard no evidence presented that indicates privacy. There is no demonstrated need for such gov- that the use of automated personal data systems has ernment power and I object to making such power created increased invasions of privacy or breaches of possible "in the name of protection of privacy." confidentiality. In fact, some speakers have stated that Several speakers have voiced the idea that "the in- no such evidence exists. We have heard only that there dividual owns data about himself." I believe this is a is a "fear" that such may be the case. fallacious and unusable concept. Based upon this unsubstantiated fear, it appears that I can create all kinds of information about an in- we are considering legislation that will force registra- dividual, based on my own observation. He does not tion and perhaps monitoring of automated personal own this information. It is mine. If I use it to harm data systems. him, then I alone am responsible and he should have It does not appear that the end justifies the means. a ready and rapid method of redress. But he does not It appears that we are placing a financial burden on own the information any more than he owns the pic- the taxpayer and the businessman simply because we ture that I may take of him. Information belongs to are afraid something might happen. the creator or the collector and he alone must be held Furthermore, periodic reporting of the existence of responsible for its accuracy and its use. an automated data file will not accomplish any practi- The way to protect privacy and confidentiality is to cal purpose. Flooding a newspaper with 15 or 20 mil- improve the procedures of redress, not to attempt to lion data file announcements a year will not increase monitor or control every personal data file at a gov- anyone's awareness of who has a file on him. Who ernmental level. has time to read the announcements or to investigate I think that we should improve redress procedures. them? We should make it easier to trace erroneous data to Existence announcements or registration will no its source. We should increase the personal data file more prevent data misuse than registration of auto- owners' awareness of their responsibility. But the rules mobiles has prevented their misuse. In fact, such regis- should apply to all personal data, whether automated tration laws: or non-automated. With the development of mini-com- 1. Are impractical and unenforceable on a broad puters, automated personal data files will soon include scale. Therefore they are unwise, because impractical Christmas card lists, YMCA swimming teams and the and unenforceable laws weaken respect for all law. neighborhood Fourth-of-July picnic list. No practical 2. Penalize automated data file owners for what they purpose would be served by requiring public notifica- can do, not for what they do. There is no evidence to tion that such files were being set up. suggest that such presumption of guilt is justified. Finally, we may find that a public notice require- 3. Make it possible for the government (since only ment will grow into a requirement for licensing, and it has the massive resources required) to create a that licensing will pave the way for data file taxation. complete central file on all citizens. Thus, registration Should we start down such a pathway in the absence would increase the potential for reducing individual of any evidence that the misuse of data is growing? Perhaps misuse is diminishing because of automation. Let's get some facts, let's not legislate out of fear. The supposed cure may be worse than the presumed •The views expressed are those of the author and not necessarily those of BAI or the banking industry. illness. 65OPEN FORUM REMARKS THE ADMINISTRATIVE BURDENS OF PRIVACY LEGISLATION Edwin Golding I. Office of Law Enforcement, Dept. of Treasury, Washington, D.C. 20220 When one discusses computer security, data confi- But suppose that instead of2 percent of the population, dentiality and privacy, there should be a general aware- 10 percent of the population, i.e., 20 million, are in- ness that these items operate within a system of inter- terested in making an inquiry, then: a pac tt eing hoe wlem te hn ets i. mpA ls ema enc to an ts ie oq nue on fce c, ono tn re olssh oo nuld ana ynti oc ni e- £=333X5= 1,665 man-years. element of the system affects the remaining elements. Furthermore, suppose that 10 minutes to process in- For instance, there has been considerable time spent at quiries is too conservative, instead it takes 60 minutes; this conference in order to describe the problems and so that: useful solutions for the major elements involved; that £=333X5X6=10,000 man-years. is, for computer system hardware manufacturers, soft- ware generators, service centers and their users. We If this workload of required effort was distributed say have not, however, given equal emphasis to probably to 50 locations, one for approximately each state, then the most important element of the system; that is, the the Effort (Es) required at each location might be: i wn hd ei nvid tu ha el ys bo en cow meho am n at ch te iveda pt aa rtis ofco tl hl eec ste yd ste es mpe pc ei rall sy e tP s=— 10,— 00—0 =2^ 0. 0^ man-years. and query agencies, organizations, etc., to find out not only what files there is data on them but also the in- The 10,000 man-years of effort required at a central formation content of such files. The enormity of prob- location or the 200 man-years at each of 50 locations lems that could result in both administrative and dollar are just possible estimates for initial requests. One can requirements should be clearly understood before there assign his own cost factor and calculate thedollar value is a broad institution of search and query by the gen- for the man-years estimated. In addition, one should eral public. This is necessary in order to provide an consider that there are always follow-up requests, re- adequate system to handle inquiries that could result. programming of computer software instruction, length- For instance, let us hypothesize that 2 percent of ier searches, etc., and as a result the estimates could the population suddenly makes inquiries and each in- be changed depending on what percent factor is used quiry takes 10 minutes to process fully (i.e., search to estimate the effect ofsuch action. files, make computer runs, prepare correspondence, Again, the purpose of the above is not to down play etc.). the rights of an individual with respect to information £= privacy and confidentiality but to make us aware of Letting Man-years of effort required to process the impact! inquiries by individuals with respect to There are solutions. Some are extreme, like purging what data in what files effects them every file and starting all over with affidavits showing Then : E= ^ a wn ithind di av ti adu sa pl e' cs ifc ico an ld le ysc oe nnd he in mc .e Ato leh ssav ee xtf ril ee ms est sr iu tc ut au tr ie od n could be the structuring of particular data inventories Where: Pj= Population size=200 million similar to that used by the Civil Service in their Execu- %i= Percent of population making an tive Inventory files. inquiry=2% In summary, before any laws are enacted, the pre- ii=Time required to process an inquiry= ceding calculations seem to indicate that in depth con- 10 minutes sitderation should be given to coping with the adminis- A.= # of man-hours/years (8 hour/day, trative burdens that could be created in order to carry 40 hour/week) out the law. They could be horrendous. Then: £=333 man-years Thank you. 66CLOSING REMARKS Ruth M. Davis Director, Institute for Computer Sciences and Teehnology National Bureau of Standards, Washington, D.C. 20234 Ladies and Gentlemen: This marks the conclusion of This is an excellent way to get your opinions known; a two-part series of Conferences which started last No- and, we're delighted to make them available to people vember. We sponsored these Conferences as part ofour who will make use of them. assigned task of resolving some of the problems of data Where we have specific responsibilities and authori- confidentiality and computer security. We have taken ties in the Department of Commerce, it's even easier this responsibility rather seriously, as have you. There to carry out our commitments to you. Let me remind has been, for example, a total attendance ofaround 850 you of some of these responsibilities. We have the between the two Conferences; this indicates widespread responsibility for developing standards which impinge interest and concern for the "Privacy" issue. on all Federal information processing activities. These We very definitely intend to carry out what we standardsare mandatory and can provide a tremendous promised at the first Conference. As you remember, the leverage for action since the Federal Government is first Conference was aimed principally at identifying still the single largest computer customer in the coun- the needs and the problems of government in assuring try and hasthe responsibility for protecting the public's the confidentiality of data in automated systems. We rights, such as privacy. We also have the responsibility have already published a summary of that Conference withm the Government for marshalling and monitoring which has been distributed to all attendees and is avail- the Federal Government's activities in the voluntary able to everyone as an NBS publication. We have at- standards efforts sponsored within the private sector. tempted to use the second Confe —rence as a return en- We must assess the adequacy of Federal R&D in com- gagement platf —orm for anybody any organization or puter sciences and technology including Federal R&D any individual who wanted to provide views on in computer security and privacy. We have the respon- actions that might be taken. We have representatives sibility for providing to GSA and 0MB the technical here these last two days from Congress, from State basis for their policies on computer utilization. The legislative bodies, from professional associations and Secretary of Commerce, for example, is offering the societies, from the legal community, from trade associ- same assistance to Vice President Ford and his Com- ations, individual computer and consulting companies mittee on Privacy. Being in the Department of Com- and, of course, a number of private individuals. We merce, we serve as a liaison with industry and have are going to publish all papers presented at this Con- the responsibility, as related to computers, for provid- ference. ing the proper environment for commerce and industry. We also promised that we would make sure that all We do not have major responsibilities in the privacy actions, recommendations, views and concensuses that area other than influencing what's done in making were generated from these two Conferences would get privacy policy and in making sure that we don't trip into the hands of the people who were making or in- ourselves up as we try to adhere simultaneously to the fluencing policy. We believed, and you verified it, that need for privacy, freedom of information and integrity this included Congress, the Executive Branch of the of information. Government, the court system. State and local govern- These Conferences have suggested a wide spectrum ments, and the computer industry as well as related of actions to ease the problems of data confidentiality industries. We intend to do as we promised. For ex- and computer security. Some of them we can do our- ample, a letter has been prepared for Vice President selves and some we're going to recommend be done by Ford, who has just been designated by the President other authorities. The spectrum is too broad to do any- to chair the Domestic Council Committee on Privacy, thing at this time except give you a few examples. which promises that the results of these two Confer- It looks as if it is going to be just as important as ences will be given to him within ten days. We will we had initially thought to get cohesiveness in the legis- also convey this information to the Congressional com- lative and judicial comments concerned with uniform mittees that are holding hearings. You will recall that State laws to get some uniformity in the State laws. one of the comments made here today was the lack of We're also going to try to get better technical input good technical input to these hearings. We want to to Congressional committees. Congressman Koch said begin to remedy this by providing the best of what it has become very clear that this needs to happen. was said at these Conferences and any arrived-at con- Another area, for example, that we have not touched sensus. on extensively but which has come up through default, In this regard, I really have been very much en- is the education of everyone concerning privacy. We couraged by the kinds of statements made today by haven't really educated ourselves enough and certainly representatives of institutions in our society, such as have not educated the public either. The American the American Medical Records Association, American Civil Liberties Union has a publication and reports that Hospital Association, the Bank Administration Insti- come out on a regular basis on privacy. There is obvi- tute, MIT, Harvard, and some government agencies. ously a need for us in the Government to provide more— education now in this area than we have been able fore, of voluntary and mandatory standards is going to to do. be what we will see in the near future. We want to and can engage more directly in such Other areas for action include better individual iden- activities as pointing out problems of the private sector. tification. The President's message cites the rights of We don't believe there is much incentive for industry citizens to inspect and to be able to correct their rec- to put their own funds into R&D and to invest in good, ords. This is not security; this is the opposite. It re- safe, secure systems when those systems are going to quires good administrative procedures, good data base be more expensive than the ones that we novv' use, un- management, good validation of software, and good less the Government requires security safeguards for audit procedures. individual privacy. So we think there is an absolute All of these measures add up to an amount of money need for the Government to stimulate R&D in the for which we do not have good estimates. One thing private sector through the development of standards, that is sure is that the problem is difficult and com- the development of legislation and the development of plex. When you have a public good, such as privacy, requirements for safeguards. Otherwise, there is no the pro])lem of "who pays for it" has not yet been reason for industry to do more than it has already. determined. You have identified the complexities far It's more fun to tackle the exotic technological better than I can. I have already mentioned that we aspects of the problem, but there is also a great ne —ed have to provide simultaneously for the freedom of you heard about it this afternoon and yesterday for information, privacy of individuals, and integrity of good administrative security. There is an administra- information. We have demonstrated these last couple tive security handbook that will be published next of days that the total assurance of what I call simplistic month by the National Bureau of Standards. GSA in- individual privacy is difficult, if not impossible, to tends to issue it as a suggested format for Government achieve. It is compounded by the need to assure the managers. There is also an executive guide to security privacy of individual suppliers and users of informa- that will be coming out soon intended to help execu- tion as well as the privacy of these people who are tives plan and evaluate their security measures. Final- the subject of information. But I think, happily, that ly, I think it is incumbent upon us to recommend that we are now entering the productive stage in computer the R —&D programs that are underway now and are security, data confidentiality and individual privacy. good those of A —RPA. those of NSF, and other Gov- We now talk rationally and reasonably. We have heard ernment agencies be continued and expanded. And people give very thoughtful and very deliberate ap- the Government agencies that are not performing R&D proaches to the problem. I see no reason why these in this area, but should be. should be encouraged to should be withheld from policymakers, from the new become active and have this justified in their budget. Committee on Privacy, or from the Congress. We will This is where the Department of Commerce and, par- make every attempt to get these views to all of those ticularly, the National Bureau of Standards, acts as an people to help them carry out their responsibilities. amicus curiae to support this kmd of R&D by other Meanwhile, we want to thank you, the speakers and Government agencies. We would like to think that in those of you that have participated, for your interest our role as standards-maker we could rely on voluntary and contributions. If you want a good definition of standards, and maybe we can. But when the rights of productivity, I would suggest that it is characterized citizens and public protection are involved, one may by what's happened in the two days of this Conference need mandatory standards. Some combination, there- and the two days in November. Thank you very much. 68Appendix A Conference Program Monday, March 4, 1974 8:15a.m. CONFERENCE REGISTRATION Pragmatic Aproaches to Software Security CONFERENCE INTRODUCTION Richard L. Caplan 9:30 Welcome Advanced Computer Techniques Corporation New York, New York Dr. Richard W. Roberts, Director National Bureau of Standards 5:15 ADJOURN Opening Address Honorable Betsy Ancker-Johnson Tuesday, March 5, 1974 Assistant Secretary for Science and Technology Department oj Commerce 8:15a.m. CONFERENCE REGISTRATION 9:50 CURRENT LEGISLATIVE PROPOSALS 9:00 August G. W. Diddle Executive Director, Computer Industry Association Arthur R. Miller, Session Chairman Professor of Law, Harvard Law School 9:30 Donn W. Sanford Executive Director, Data Processing Management Honorable Edward I. Koch Member of Congress, 18th District, New York Association 9:45 John Christiansen Honorable Barry M. Goldvvater, Jr. Member of Congress, 27th District, California Chairman, Standards Committee, Association of Data Processing Service Organizations 11:00 COFFEE BREAK 10:15 COFFEE BREAK 11:30 CURRENT LEGISLATIVE PROPOSALS A Systematic Approach to Data Security (cont'd) R. L. Thomas Jane L. Hardaway Robert H. Courtney Member, HEW Advisory Committee on Automated IBM Corporation Personal Data Systems Armonk, New York Honorable Stanley J. Aronoff Ohio State Senator 11:45 Achieving Security in Computer Networks Honorable Mike Cullen Peter S. Browne California A.ssemblyman General Electric Information Services Business Division LUNCH 1:30 OPEN FORUM 2:00 Peter F. McCloskey 12:15p.m. President, Computer and Business Equipment 1:00 LUNCH Manufacturers Association 2:00 INFORMATION AND SECURITY 2:30 Robert W. Rector MANAGEMENT j ! Executive Director, AmericanFederation of Joseph F. Cunningham, Session Chairman Information Processing Societies Executive Director, Association for Computing 2:45 BREAK Machinery I 3:00 COMPUTER SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE AND Risk Analysisin Planning for Physical Security fi ACCESS CONTROLS Robert V. Jacobson I Sentor Security Group, Inc. Oliver R. Smoot, Session Chairman Neiv York, New York Director, Industry Programs, Computer and Business ^ Security Considerations in Information Equipment Manufacturers Association j Security Architecture Using Encryption System Design Steven B. Lipner Richard R. Keys MITRE Corporation Honeyivell Corporation Bedford, Massachusetts Phoenix, Arizona Auditing Current Systems Access Controls in Burroughs Large Systems Harvey W. Bingham Donn B. Parker Stanford Research Institute Burroughs Corporation Menlo Park, California Paoli, Pennsylvania Systems Architecture for Security and 3:45p.m. CLOSING REMARKS Projection Dr. Ruth M. Davis James P. Anderson Director, Institute for Computer Sciences and James P. Anderson Company Technology W Ft. ashington, Pennsylvania National Bureau of StandardsAppendix B Executive Summary, Conference on Privacy and Security in Computer Systems November 19-20, 1973 A two-day conference on Privacy and Security in privacy and computer security problems. These may Computer Systems was sponsored by and held at the be identified as: National Bureau of Standards on November 19-20, 1973. Five hundred and ten people from government, • Protection of the privacy of the individual: a the computer industry, and various public interest responsibility of the legislative and judiciary branches of government. groups met to hear presentations of the needs and problems that confront governmental agencies in safe- • Providing guidelines to assure information man- guarding individual privacy and protecting confidential agement is incompliance with legislative and judi- data from loss or misuse. cial requirements for privacy: a responsibility of Lawmakers at Federal, State and local levels of government, management, and industry. government are increasingly aware of the public's con- • Development and application of the needed auto- cern over computer-based recordkeeping and its im- mation and information management technologies plications for personal privacy. This concern has arisen and products: a responsibility of industry and the partly out of fear of the impersonal super-efficient government. image that computers present and partly out of a reasoned concern over the expansion of governmental • Assessment andassignment ofthe costs of Security recordkeeping activities which computers make possi- in Automation: a responsibility of the govern- ble. Lawmakers are responding to this concern by pro- ment, industry and the public. posing and enacting laws that are intended to specifi- • Management of information in automated record- cally safeguard the rights and interests of individuals keeping systems: a responsibility of management by prescribing the circumstances and the manner in and information management technologists. which personal data can be collected, used and dis- seminated. While the solutions for safeguarding privacy are These legislative actions, if taken unilaterally, to be found in legislative or regulatory sources, solu- present the prospect of potentially conflicting require- tions for protecting confidential data are found in ments being imposed upon those charged with their physical security measures and in the technological implementation. Further, the technological capability safeguards and procedures which permit controlled needed to assure compliance with these requirements accessibility to the systems and data. is not generally available. Compounding these problems The broad scope of controlled accessibility pre- areare increased public pressures to operate govern- cludes simple solutions. It embraces the use of special- ments economically. These pressures foreclose the sim- ized hardware and software with built-in protective plistic solution of using dedicated computers to process features, mechanisms for authorizing access to systems confidential data, yet the computer systems present and data, techniques for uniquely identifying individ- available for resource sharing provide few techniques uals who are authorized to gain access, cryptographic for controlling access to confidential data. These inter- devices and encryption algorithms to protect data related considerations strongly suggest that all of the during transmission among systems, and auditing or legislative, technological and managerial solutions that monitoring techniques for measuring system events of can be brought to bear upon the problems of privacy security interest. and security must be effectively integrated so that a While various techniques for access control exist, proper balance of needs and values in relation to costs there are few guidelines for the application of these can be achieved. techniques. Lacking such guidelines, system usersapply The assignment and acceptance of responsibilities protection controls that are either inadequate or ex- for accomplishing this objective requires a recognition cessively costly for the degree of protection they of the separable but interrelated components of the require. The importance of considering the cost of 70applying security measures cannot be over-emphasized, • Research and development of new mechanisms since security is always a cost vs. effectiveness trade- and techniques where significant needs cannot be off. A highly important extension of this managerial met satisfactorily by existing technology. Among concern is the question of how much the public wil the needs requiring this type of effort are self- be willing to pay for the protection of individual priv- protected computer systems which have the inter- acy and how the incremental cost for security is to be nal ability to enforce the access controls necessary allocated among government, industry and the public. for the prescribed level of security. Other needs Major needs for alleviating the problems of priv- include techniques for positively and uniquely acy, data confidentiality and computer security were identifying individuals who have authorization for identified on an initial basis. A realistic approach for accessto the system and data and the development addressing these needs could consist of parallel and of secure network models for evaluating alterna- coordinated efforts directed toward: tive network designs. • Achieving a national coherence among laws de- • A study of the costs of data confidentiality and fining the privacy rights of individuals and the security to build an understanding useful in mak- basic information practices to be followed in pro- ing public choices about degrees of privacy de- tecting these rights. sired by individuals and for allocating costs • Establishing uniform management and technical among the public, industry and government. procedures for effectively applying security meas- It is hoped that the Conference will stimulate the ures. Important needs are techniques for assessing computer industry and other interested parties to pro- risks, determining threats and threat sources, eval- pose specific approaches and solutions to the needs and uating alternative security measures, auditing the problems outlined and will promote new initiatives effectiveness of existing measures and physical for protecting data confidentiality in computer-based security. records systems. A second Conference is planned for March 4^5, • Innovative applications of existing technology to 1974, which will provide an opportunity for the pres- enhance security effectiveness. Specific needs entation of proposed technological and regulatory solu- which are susceptible to solution in this way in- tions to the computer security needs and problems clude the retrofitting of existing systems to satisfy new security requirements and the use of encryp- identified in this Conference. tion techniques in civilian applications for protect- ingdata during transmission. 71) NBS-114A (REV. 7-73) U.S. DEPT. OF COMM. 1. PUBLICATION OR REPORT NO. 2. Gov't Accession 3. Recipient's Accession No. BIBLIOGRAPHIC DATA No. NBS-SP-404 SHEET 4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 5. Publication Date Approaches To September 1974 PRIVACY and SECURITY in COMPUTER SYSTEMS 6. Performing Organization Code 7. AUTHOR(S) 8. Performing Organ. Report No. Clark Renninger 9. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME AND ADDRESS 10. Project/Task/Work Unit No. NATIONAL BUREAU OF STANDARDS DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE 11. Contract/Grant No. WASHINGTON, D.C. 20234 12. Sponsoring Organization Name and Complete Address (Street, City, State, ZIP) 13. Type of Report & Period Covered Final 14. Sponsoring Agency Code SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 15. 16. ABSTRACT (A 200-word or less factual summary of most significant information. If document includes a significant bibliography or literature survey, mentionit here.) This publication summarizes and contains the proceedings of a conference held at the National Bureau of Standards on March 4-5, 1974 to continue the dialog in search of ways to protect confidential information in computer system. Proposals are presented for meeting governmental needs in safeguarding individual privacy and data confidentiality that were identified at a conference held in November 1973. Among the proposals are the enactment of privacy legislation, improved computer system architecture and access controls, information and security management guidelines and the development of a systematic, balanced approach to system security. The proposals were presented by legislators, citizens, computer industry associations and companies, professional societies, and public interest groups. 17. KEY WORDS (six to twelve entries; alphabetical order; capitalize only the first letter of the first key word unless a proper name; separated by semicolons Computer systems; confidentiality; privacy; privacy and security; security. 18. AVAILABILITY [X Unlimited 19. (S TE HC IU SR RI ET PY OC RL TA )SS 21. NO. OF PAGES 1 ' For Official Distribution. Do Not Release to NTIS UNCLASSIFIED 84 1 "X^O Wr ad se hr inF Er to om n.Su Dp .. C.of 20D 4o 0c 2, . U S. DS. CaG to .ve Nr o.nm Ce 1n 3t .Pr 1i 0n :ti 4n le )4Office 20. (S TE HC I: SUR PI AT GY E)CLASS 22. Price $1.45 1 1 O Spr rd ie nr gfF ir elo dm ,N Va it ri go in na il a T 2e 2c 1h 51nical Information Service (NTIS) UNCLASSIFIED 1 ( USCOMM-DC 29042-P'NBS TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS — PERIODICALS National Standard Reference Data Series- Provides JOURNALOFRESEARCH reports National Bureau quantitative data on the physical and chemical proper- of Standards research and development in physics, ties of materials, compiled from the world's literature mathematics, and chemistry. Comprehensive scientific and critically evaluated. Developed under a world-wide p laa bp oe rr as tog r' yive datc ao ,mp el xe pt ee rimd ee nta ti al ls po rf ocet dh ue rew so ,r ak, ndi tn hc el ou rd ei tn ig - p ofro Ng ar ta im onc ao lor Sd ti an nat de ad rdby DaN tB aS. AcP tro (g Pr ua bm licund Le ar wau 9t 0h -o 3r 9i 6t )y . cal and mathematical analyses. Illustrated with photo- See also Section 1.2.3. g Nr Ba Sphs p, apd er ra swi an sgs i, ssa un edd .charts. Includes listings of other B mu ai tl id oi nng deS vc ei le on pc ee dS ae tri te hs e— BD ui rs es ae umin oa nte bs uilt de ic nh gnic ma al teri in af lo sr ,- Published in two sections, available separately: components, systems, and whole structures. The series • Physics and Chemistry (Section A) presents research results, test methods, and perform- ance criteria related to the structural and environmen- Papers of interest primarily to scientists working in tal functions and the durability and safety character- these fields. This section covers a broad range of physi- istics of building elements and systems. cal and chemical research, with major emphasis on — standards of physical measurement, fundamental con- Technical Notes Studies or reports which are complete stants, and properties of matter. Issued six times a in themselves but restrictive in their treatment of a year. Annual subscription: Domestic, $17.00; Foreign, subject. Analogous to monographs but not so compre- $21.25. hensive in scope or definitive in treatment of the sub- • Mathematical Sciences (Section B) j we oc rt kar pe ea r. foO rf mt ee dn as ter Nv Be Sas una dev rehi tc hl ee sf po or nsf oi rn sal hir pep oo frt os theo rf Studies and compilations designed mainly for the math- government agencies. ematician and theoretical physicist. Topics in mathe- — matical statistics, theory of experiment design, numeri- Voluntary Product Standards Developed under pro- cal analysis, theoretical physics and chemistry, logical cedures published by the Department of Commerce in design and programming of computers and computer Part 10, Title 15, of the Code of Federal Regulations. systems. Short numerical tables. Issued quarterly. An- The purpose of the standards is to establish nationally nual subscription: Domestic, $9.00; Foreign, $11.25. recognized requirements for products, and to provide DIM —ENSIONS/NBS (formerly Technical News Bul- a sl tl anc do in nc gern oe fd ti hn eter ce hs at rs acw ti ert ih sta icb sasi os f f to hr ec po rm om duo cn tsu .nd Te hr e- letin) This monthly magazine is published to inform National Bureau of Standards administers the Volun- s sc ti ue dn et ni ts st ,s, ae nn dgin ce oer ns s, umebu rs sin oe fssm te hn e, li an td eu ststr ay d, vat ne ca ech sers i, n t tha ery aP cr to ivd iu tc it esSt oa fnda tr heds pp rr io vag tr eam sea cs toa r s su tp ap nl de am re dn it zint go science and technology, with primary emphasis on the organizations. work at NBS. DIMENSIONS/NBS highlights and reviews such Federal Inform —ation Processing Standards Publications issues as energy research, fire protection, building (FIPS PUBS) Publications in this series collectively technology, metric conversion, pollution abatement, constitute the Federal Information Processing Stand- health and safety, and consumer product performance. ards Register. The purpose of the Register is to serve In addition, DIMENSIONS/NBS reports the results of as the official source of information in the Federal Gov- Bureau programs in measurement standards and tech- ernment regarding standards issued by NBS pursuant niques, properties of matter and materials, engineering to the Federal Property and Administrative Services standards and services, instrumentation, and automatic Act of 1949 as amended. Public Law 89-306 (79 Stat. data processing. 1127), and as implemented by Executive Order 11717 Annual subscription: Domestic, $6.50; Foreign, $8.25. 1( 538 CF FR R12 (3 C1 o5 d, eda ot fed FeM da ery al11, Re1 g9 u7 l3 a) tia onn sd ).Par Ft IP6 Sof PT Ui Btl Se NONPERIODICALS will include approved Federal information processing Monographs— Major contributions to the technical liter- s plt ea tn eda ir nd ds exin of for rm ea lt ei vo ann to sf tag ne dn ae rr da sl pi un bt le ire cs at t, iona sn .d a com- ature on various subjects related to the Bureau's scien- — tific and technical activities. Consumer Information Series Practical information, Handbooks— Recommended codes of engineering and based on NBS research and experience, covering areas industrial practice (including safety codes) developed of interest to the consumer. Easily understandable in cooperation with interested industries, professional language and illustrations provide useful background organizations, and regulatory bodies. knowledge for shopping in today's technological — marketplace. nS ap te ic oi na al lPu ab nl dica it ni to en rs natI in oc nal lude cop nr fo ec re ee nd ci en sgs so pf onh si og rh e- dlev be yl NBS Interagency Reports—A special series of interim NBS, precision measurement and calibration volumes, or final reports on work performed by NBS for outside NBS annual reports, and other special publications sponsors (both government and non-government). In appropriate to this grouping such as wall charts and general, initial distribution is handled by the sponsor; bibliographies. public distribution is by the National Technical Infor- Applied Mathematics Series— Mathematical tables, mation Service (Springfield, Va. 22151) in paper copy manuals, and studies of special interest to physicists, or microfiche form. engineers, chemists, biologists, mathematicians, com- Order NBS publications (except Bibliographic Sub- puter programmers, and others engaged in scientific scription Services) from: Superintendentof Documents, and technical work. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C. 20402. BIBLIOGRAPHIC SUBSCRIPTION SERVICES The following current-awareness and literature-survey ceding bibliographic services to the U.S. Department bibliographies are issued periodically by the Bureau: of Commerce, National Technical Information Serv- Cryogenic Data Center Current Awareness Service ice, Springfield, Va. 22151. (Publications and Reports of Interest in Cryogenics). Electromagnetic Metrology Current Awareness Service A literature survey issued weekly. Annual subscrip- (Abstracts of Selected Articles on Measurement tion: Domestic, $20.00; foreign, $25.00. Techniques and Standards of Electromagnetic Quan- Liquefied Natural Gas. A literature survey issued quar- tities from D-C to Millimeter-Wave Frequencies). terly. Annual subscription: $20.00. Issued monthly. Annual subscription: $100.00 (Spe- cial rates for multi-subscriptions). Send subscription Superconducting Devices and Materials. A literature order and remittance to the Electromagnetic Metrol- survey issued quarterly. Annual subscription: $20.00. ogy Information Center, Electromagnetics Division, Send subscription orders and remittances for the pre- National Bureau of Standards, Boulder, Colo. 80302.U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE National Bureau of Standards Washington. D.C. 20234 POSTAGE AND FEES PAID U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE OFFICIAL BUSINESS COM-255 PenaltyforPrivateUse.$300