A111D3 Dfi^bM? NAnINSTOFSTANDARDS&TECHR.I.C. NCE & TECHNOLOGY: A11103089647 Ruder,Brian/Ananalysisofcomputersaf QC100.U57NO.500-25,1978C.2NBS-PUB-C AN ANALYSIS OF COMPUTER SECURITY SAFEGUARDS FOR AND DETECTING PREVENTING INTENTIONAL COMPUTER MISUSE NBS Special Publication 500-25 DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE U.S. National Bureau of StandardsNATIONAL BUREAU OF STANDARDS The National Bureau of Standards^ was established by an act of Congress March 3, 1901. The Bureau's overall goal is to strengthen and advance the Nation's science and technology and facilitate their effective application for public benefit. To this end, the Bureau conducts research and provides: (1) a basis for the Nation's physical measurement system, (2) scientific and technological services for industry and government, (3) a technical basis for equity in trade, and (4) technical services to pro- mote public safety. The.Bureau consists of the Institute for Basic Standards, the Institute for Materials Research, the Institute for Applied Technology, the Institute for Computer Sciences and Technology, the Office for Information Programs, and the Office of Experimental Technology Incentives Program. THE INSTITUTE FOR BASIC STANDARDS provides the central basis within the United States of a complete and consist- ent system of physical measurement; coordinates that system with measurement systems ofother nations; and furnishes essen- tial services leading to accurate and uniform physical measurements throughout the Nation's scientific community, industry, and commerce. The Institute consists of the Office of Measurement Services, and the following center and divisions: — — — — — — Applied Mathematics —Electricity —Mechanics Heat —Optical Physics Center for Radiation Research Lab- oratory Astrophysics° Cryogenics' Electromagnetics^ Time and Frequency'. THE INSTITUTE FOR MATERIALS RESEARCH conducts materials research leading to improved methods of measure- ment, standards, and data on the properties of well-characterized materials needed by industry, commerce, educational insti- tutions, and Government; provides advisory and research services to other Government agencies; and develops, produces, and distributes standard reference materials. The Institute consists of the Office of Standard Reference Materials, the Office of Air and Water Measurement, and the following divisions: — — — — — Analytical Chemistry Polymers Metallurgy Inorganic Materials Reactor Radiation Physical Chemistry. THE INSTITUTE FOR APPLIED TECHNOLOGY provides technical services developing and promoting the use of avaU- able technology; cooperates with public and private organizations in developing technological standards, codes, and test meth- ods; and provides technical advice services, and information to Government agencies and the public. The Institute consists of the following divisions and centers: — — Standards Application and Analysis —Electronic Technology Center for Consumer Product Technology: Product Systems Analysis; Product Engineering Center fo—r Building Technology: Structures, Materials, and Safety; Building Environment; Technical Evaluation and Application Center for Fire Research: Fire Science; Fire Safety Engineering. THE INSTITUTE FOR COMPUTER SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY conducts research and provides technical services designed to aid Government agencies in improving cost effectiveness in the conduct of their programs through the selection, acquisition, and effective utilization of automatic data processing equipment; and serves as the principal focus wthin the exec- utive branch for the development of Federal standards for automatic data processing equipment, techniques, and computer languages. The Institute consist of the following divisions: — — — Computer Services Systems and Software Computer Systems Engineering Information Technology. THE OFFICE OF EXPERIMENTAL TECHNOLOGY INCENTIVES PROGRAM seeks to affect public policy and process to facilitate technological change in the private sector by examining and experimenting with Government policies and prac- tices in order to identify and remove Government-related barriers and to correct inherent market imperfections that impede the innovation process. THE OFFICE FOR INFORMATION PROGRAMS promotes optimum dissemination and accessibility of scientific informa- tion generated within NBS; promotes the development of the National Standard Reference Data System and a system of in- formation analysis centers dealing with the broader aspects of the National Measurement System; provides appropriate services to ensure that the NBS staff has optimum accessibility to the scientific information of the world. The Office consists of the following organizationalunits: — — — — Office of Standard Reference Data — Office of Information Activities Office of Technical Publications Library Office of International Standards Office of International Relations. 'Headquarters and Laboratories at Gaithersburg, Maryland, unless otherwise noted; mailing address Washington, D.C. 20234. ^Located at Boulder, Colorado 80302.BATIONAL BTJRKA' • V PF BTAKDAPI ^LIBRAr' m COMPUTER SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY: i(f An Analysis of Computer Security Safeguards ^ for Detecting and Preventing Intentional 7 Computer Misuse ^^<^^g ^^ix^c^^.w Brian Ruder and J.D. Madden Stanford Research Institute Menlo Park, California 94025 Robert P. Blanc, Editor Institute forComputer SciencesandTechnology National Bureau of Standards Washington, D.C. 20234 U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE, Juanita M. Kreps, Secretary Dr. Sidney Harman, Under Secretary Jordan J. Baruch, Assistant Secretary for Science and Technology U S -NATIONAL BUREAU OF STANDARDS, ErnestAmbler, Acting Director Issued January 1978Reports on Computer Science and Technology The National Bureau of Standards has a special responsibility within the Federal Government for computer science and technology activities. The programs of the NBS Institute for Computer Sciences and Technology are designed to provide ADP standards, guidelines, and technical advisory services to improve theeffectiveness of computer utilization in the Federal sector, and to perform appropriateresearch and developmentefforts as foundation for such activities andprograms. Thispublication series will report theseNBS efforts to the Federal computer community as well as to interested specialists in the academic and private sectors. Those wishing to receive notices ofpublications in this series should complete and return the form at the end of this publication. National Bureau of Standards Special Publication 500-25 Nat. Bur. Stand. (U.S.), Spec. Publ. 500-25, 80.pages (Jan. 1978) CODEN: XNBSAV Library ofCongress Catalogingin Publication Data Ruder, Brian. An analysis ofcomputer safeguards for detecting and preventing intentional computermisuse. (Computerscience&technology) (NBSspecialpublication 500-25) ; Supt. ofDocs, no.: CI3.10:500-25 1. Computer crimes. 2. Computers—Access control. 3. Electronic data processing departments—Security measures. I. Madden, J. D., jointauthor. II.Title. III.Series. IV.Series: UnitedStates. National Bureau ofStandards. Special publication 500-25. ; QC100.U57 no. 500-25 [HV6773] 602Ms[364.r62] 77-25368 U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE WASHINGTON: 1978) Forsaleby the SuperintendentofDocuments, U.S. Government Printing Office Washington, D.C. 20402. Price $2.40—StockNo. 003-003-01871-6PREFACE The work reported here was performed at Stanford Research Institute (SRI) for the National Bureau of Standards (NBS) The . objectives of the study are to: (1) Develop a working definition of intentional computer misuse and a taxonomy to characterize the different types of intentional computer misuse. (2) Develop a ranked list of specific detection mechanisms. (3) Develop a ranked list of specific prevention mechanisms. The detection and prevention mechanisms were to be developed as a result of analysis of computer misuse case files, most of which are maintained by Mr. Donn B. Parker of SRI. Robert P. Blanc, Editor Staff Assistant for Computer Utilization Programs Institute for Computer Sciences and Technology iiiTABLE OF CONTENTS Page m Preface . Abstract = = 1 I. Introduction-' • = 2 IIo Taxonomy of Vulnerability to Intentional Misuse 3 IIIo Definition of Intentional Computer Misuse 4 IVo Safeguard Model = 4 V. Computer Security Program Requirements- -- 9 VIo Safeguard Analysis and Rankings • »- 11 VII. Summary and Conclusions 20 Appendix A. Vulnerability Category Definitions A-1 Appendix Bo Formatted Safeguard Descriptions B-1 ILLUSTRATIONS Figure 1« A Taxonomy for Vulnerabilities of Intentional Computer Misuse 5 Figure 2. A Model for Categorizing Computer Safeguards According to Responsibile Organizational Units = 6 TABLES 1. Consolidated List of Safeguards--- 14 2. Ranked Detection Safeguards 17 3. Ranked Prevention Safeguards-- 18 4. Consensus Ranking: Detection Safeguards 19 5. Consensus Ranking: Prevention Safeguards ^9 VIAN ANALYSIS OF COMPUTER SECURITY SAFEGUARDS FOR DETECTING AND PREVENTING INTENTIONAL COMPUTER MISUSE Brian Ruder J. D. Madden Stanford Research Institute Menlo Park, California 94025 ABSTRACT Stanford Research Institute (SRI) has an extensive file of actual computer misuse cases. The National Bureau of Standards asked SRI to use these caaes as a foundation to develop ranked lists of computer safeguards that would have prevented or detected the recorded intentional misuses. This report provides a working definition of intentional computer misuse, a construction of a vulnerability taxonomy of intentional computer misuse, a list of 88 computer safeguards, and a model for classifying the safeguards. In addition, there are lists ranking prevention and detection safeguards, with an explanation of the method of approach used to arrive at the lists. The report should provide the computer security specialist with sufficient information to start or enhance a computer safeguard program. KEY WORDS Computer security; computer misuse; computer safeguards; computer security model; computer crime; computer fraud; privacy. 1I. INTRODUCTION A primary objective of this report is to identify computer safeguards that would have been useful in detecting and preventing actual cases of computer misuse. Section VI contains safeguard rankings based on cases of past intentional computer misuse. These cases span the spectrum of computer misuse, but the number of cases that fall into each vulner- ability category probably do not reflect any one specific computer environment. Generally speaking, the highest ranking safeguards should be best in most environments, but the ranking process is somewhat subjective due to the nature of the cases and degree of detail specified in the safeguard description. Therefore, the rankings should not be considered absolute. Computer specialists should consider all tools as they develop their computer protection plan. A set of tools and a description of their purpose and application is provided in Appendix B. This report contains the results of six work efforts, each of which is briefly described below. The first effort involved developing a taxonomy of computer vulnerability to intentional computer misuse. The computer vulnerability taxonomy forms the foundation for the definition of intentional computer misuse as well as the foundation for categorizing past cases of computer misuse. Section II of this report contains this taxonomy. The second effort was to develop a working definition of intentional computer misuse. The persons known to be studying the area of computer misuse throughout the country were contacted to determine their current definitions relating to computer abuse or computer misuse. The resulting definition of intentional computer misuse and a discussion of how the definition was arrived at are addressed in Section III of this report. The third effort was to review the case file of computer misuses and distribute cases into appropriate vulnerability categories. Each case was placed in only one vulnerability category even though three or four misuses may have been identified in the case writeup. Each case was placed in the category corresponding to the first misuse identified in the case writeup. The fourth effort was to review case files to identify the prevention and detection safeguard mechanisms in each case that would have mitigated the misuses in that case. The safeguards from a previous NSF studyl as well as those gathered from other relevant source material were used as a base and were supplemented by the authors' experiences and ideas. "Computer System Integrity Research Program," National Science Foundation Grant DCR74-23774. 2The fifth effort was to develop a safeguard model that would provide a basis for describing, identifying, and distributing each safeguard. The most useful model appeared to be one based on organi- zational structure. Consequently, safeguards were classified into categories bearing the names of the organizational element responsible for initiation or implementation of the safeguard. This type of model allows users of this report to change the model to reflect the structure of their organization. In addition, it clearly points out that computer security is an organizational problem and not just a data processing or internal audit problem. Section IV of this report provides a description of the model. The sixth effort involved ranking the safeguard mechanisms within a vulnerability category. An algorithm was developed in which all tools were scored as to their effectiveness against the cases in each of the vulnerability categories. Since many of the cases had little informa- tion, or lacked specific technical information to permit determining how effective some of the safeguards might be, there is a subjectivity to the ranking process that we believe reflects SRI technical expertise and provides the best ranking possible. However, the reader should be aware that the ranking is not absolute and reflects the applicability of the safeguards against past cases of misuse. Section VI of this report contains the rankings. II. TAXONOMY OF VULNERABILITY TO INTENTIONAL MISUSE Three types of computer resources to be protected are identified as follows: • Intellectual property (data and programs) • Physical property (equipment and supplies) • Computer services and processes With regard to intellectual property, misuses include unauthorized modification, destruction, and disclosure. With regard to physical property, misuses include unauthorized modification, destruction and theft. With regard to services and processes, the misuses include unauthorized use (theft) or denial of authorized use. Within the intellectual property domain, it is worthwhile to identify whether or not the misuse occurred internally or externally to the computer system. Internal includes activities from the time data or programs are entered at a terminal by reading or by using some other input device until the time they are output at a printer, display terminal or other output device. External activities include all data preparation and data handling prior to the time the data are entered at an input device and after the data are output at an output device. 3The vulnerability taxonomy described has 17 separate categories. This is the minimum number of categories required to differentiate the different types of intentional misuses as far as this study is concerned. Figure 1 provides a schematic diagram of the vulnerability taxonomy as described above. Appendix A provides definitions of each category. III. DEFINITION OF INTENTIONAL COMPUTER MISUSE The concept of intentional computer misuse is used throughout the study. The definition of intentional computer misuse is a function of the vulnerability taxonomy described in Section II. Intentional computer misuse is defined as an intentional act directed at or committed with a computer system or its associated external data or program activities in which there is: • Unauthorized modification, destruction, or disclosure of intellectual property (data or programs), or • Unauthorized modification, destruction, or theft of physical property (equipment and supplies), or • Unauthorized use or denial of a computer service or process. This definition defines intentional computer misuse from a data processing point of view, consistent with the objectives of this report. IV. SAFEGUARD MODEL A safeguard model provides a means of describing, identifying, and distributing safeguards. It was decided that the most useful model would reflect organizational structure. This model reflects responsibility for initiation or implementation of the safeguards. Developing a safeguard model that is structured around the organization points out to the security specialist and to management that computer security is the responsibility of many organizational elements. In addition, the model provides a convenient mechanism for assigning safeguards identified in this report. Figure 2 provides a schematic diagram that reflects the model we suggest. Insurance, personnel, and contracts are defined as staff activities, but could be placed at the same level as operations, data processing, security or audit. Following is a brief description of each element of the model: 4< z g I- o I- co i§ ZED cc O I ICAT UCTI EFT < X 1- U. DC Q 1Z11 lAU O LU D-J ^ Q D > QC wUJ O ^ Li. Vi > ^ LU O I- X < Q. I- o O o o 1- ^ -1 < LU LU TERN, SYST TERN SYST z X LU 5111 QC 1- 5 < =^ CO CO St < z o _1 Iz- < u. o o O CO QC < LU N C IO - oUJ hD- z o Q. < < < < o o cc I<- o QC CO Iz- D o O 1 z- Q LC U o o CO _l (zJ UJ Q. a. N < LU Q<. OQ cc LzU §2 < LJJ AN < O ec O Q QC O O O CD < <! CM <i LU CO QC X D CO3 Q-. o O DC Q. -1 UJ J > Q. LU 6— • General Management This element includes those persons or functions whose primary responsibility is the management and administration of the agency. This element is responsible for establishing policy and ensuring that adequate financial and line management support is provided to carry out the agency charter. — • Personnel This subelement is responsible for maintaining personal information on employees required by the agency as well as providing the official guidelines describing the policy of the agency regarding hiring and firing criteria. — • Contracts This subelement is responsible for ensuring that all contracts, including those involving software and hardware, are well specified to minimize the potential for loss resulting from improper performance. — • Insurance This subelement is responsible for ensuring that the facilities, including software and hardware, are adequately insured. — • Operations Division Most Government agencies will have more than one operations division, but conceptually they are all similar from a data processing point of view. Consequently the model provides for only one operations division. An operations division is an organizational unit responsible for one general agency function such as logistics. Each operations division has many departments, but only two, application program development and data handling, are germane to the model. — • Application Program Development For this report, all application program development and support are placed outside of data processing, even though many agencies provide application support within data processing. This placement was chosen for convenience to separate application program safe- guards from system program safeguards. Application program development includes all facets of information collection and analysis, programming, and testing required to develop computer-based systems such as payroll, accounts payable and the like. 7— Data Handling This component Includes all facets of data preparation, transport to and from input and output devices, and report distribution and storage. — Audit This element includes the internal audit and automatic data processing (ADP) audit function. (The audit safeguards in this report reflect primarily ADP auditing.) The responsibility of this element includes verification and evaluation of controls, standards, and data processing results. — Security This element is responsible for computer security, policy and coordination as well as traditional security items such as safes, locks, etc. Many agencies may have the computer security administration function located within the data processing function. Others believe it should be outside data processing to assure it can operate independently and objectively. — Data Processing This element includes the management and operation of all computer equipment, personnel and space to meet the agency's ADP requirements. — System Control This element is responsible for ensuring the integrity of the operating system and environment in which application programs execute. It has three components: Application Interface, Internal Control, and Hardware Support. — Application Interface This component is responsible for specifying application program standards and ensuring that all application systems are properly tested and documented. It is also responsible for program change control. — Internal Control This component is responsible for cataloging all internal controls available and ensuring that operational application system controls are in place and working. In addition, this component ensures that the operating system has adequate internal controls and is maintained properly. — Hardware Support This component is responsible for ensuring that hardware maintenance is performed in a reliable and valid manner. In addition, this component 8. is responsible for the acquisition and maintenance of any hardware required to support security safeguards — • Operations This element is responsible for the day- to-day operation of all computer equipment. It also is responsible for media backup, transport, and storage. V. COMPUTER SECURITY PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS This report is oriented toward identifying prevention and detection safeguards that would have been effective against actual cases of intentional computer misuse. There is, however, a require- ment that an organization have an overall computer security program within which the safeguards can function. The basis for a computer security program is management policy and support that clearly define a computer security charter and its scope. Following is a brief discussion of basic elements required to establish such a program that will allow the prevention and detection safeguards to be effec- tively implemented and used. It is important to note that the following is a description of only one of various possible organizational structures. Further guidance will be forthcoming from NBS in the area of computer security program requirements. Computer Security Policy and Control - General management must . ensure that the agency has a computer security policy coordination function. This function may be the responsiblity of one or more persons who act as a focus for computer security policy and coordination. This function should reside outside data processing, but those respon- sible should work very closely with data processing management. In the suggested safeguard model, the policy and coordination function would reside with security. Its primary responsibilities are to develop workable computer security standards and to coordinate the acquisition or implementation of computer security safeguards. In addition, this function works closely with the audit function to verify compliance to standards and adequacy of safeguards in place. ADP Audit Function - It is important to have well-trained ADP auditors within the audit function. The ADP audit function is a relatively new function that works almost exclusively verifying the accuracy and completeness of computer-based information systems. General management must ensure that the ADP audit function has a clearly defined charter that includes responsibilities of ADP auditors in each of the following areas: 91. System Development - the ADP auditor monitors the develop- ment process and acts as an advisor to the user regarding Internal controls that should be designed Into the applica- tion system. These controls include run-to-run totals, logging, and usage reports. The ADP auditor does not participate in the actual design or implementation of the system. 2. Testing - the ADP auditor ensures the adequacy of test procedures and verifies the existence and adequacy of internal controls. 3. Operations - the ADP auditor performs op.erational audits to ensure compliance to standards generated by the system control function and the data processing function. These include standards on items such as media labeling, handling and storage. 4. Post-installation Review - the ADP auditor works with the user to determine the actual characteristics of the system and whether they meet the users requirements as Intended. 5. Thru-the-Computer-Audit - the ADP auditors should use the computer to assist them in auditing information accuracy and completeness. In particular, the auditors should include audit of data stored internally to the computer system, i.e., the auditors should not audit "around the computer." System Design Standards - General management should ensure that internal controls and other security mechanisms are included among the system design considerations. Standards or guidelines should be established to ensure that they are included. Insurance - General management should require that the ADP insurance program is current and that a risk assessment is made to establish the completeness of items insured and the amounts for which they are insured. Contracts - General management should ensure that the responsible personnel in the contracts office are properly trained in ADP technolog and terminology and are aware of particular problems associated with contracting for computer programs, ADP equipment, supplies and services It is important that general management recognize the importance of its role in any successful computer security program. A study for 10the Institute of Internal Auditors recently completed by SRI indicates that general management support for audit and control programs needs to be improved if the integrity of computer-based information systems is to be ensured. Safeguard Implementation Strategy - An important point to consider in developing a safeguard program is how the safeguards should be applied, i.e., the strategy of safeguarding computer systems. Providing a complete strategy is beyond the scope of this report, but a few basic considerations are provided. First, the case files indicated that the most misused systems include: • Payroll • Accounts payable and receivable • Certificate generating (license, stocks, etc.) • Social payment (welfare and other benefits) • Operating system (vendor-supplied system that runs the computer) These systems should be protected first. Second, the safeguards provided are broad in their application. The security specialist must consider the safeguards in the context of the specific environment. Third, the method for determining which safeguards are best for a particular environment requires the establishment of a formal risk assessment. Guidelines for Automatic Data Processing Physical Security and Risk Management (FIPS PUB 31) and Automatic Data Processing Risk Assessment (NBSIR 77-1228) both published by NBS are excellent documents to start the risk assessment process. The most important item to recognize in performing a risk assessment is that no two ADP environments are the same and thus each environment must be evaluated to determine the best strategy for protecting it. VI. SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS AND RANKINGS Safeguard Classification For this report, a safeguard is classified as a detection mechanism if it operates after the occurence of the misuse, regardless of whether it operates within a few seconds or a number of days after the misuse. In a number of cases, the time period in which the safeguard operates is a function of how it is implemented and used within an organization. 11For example, some of the logging safeguards could be Implemented to trigger an action when a specific type of record is encountered or to allow review of the record at the end of some specified time period, possibly a day. A total of 88 safeguards are described in this report. Of these 32 are detection safeguards and 56 are prevention safeguards. Of the 32 detection safeguards, 15 are within the responsibility of the Audit function. Most audit safeguards are for use by ADP auditors. The ADP Audit function is rapidly becoming one of the most important functions within organizations concerned with vulnerabilities of computer systems. The Internal Control element within the data processing function has responsibility for 19 safeguards because of the definition assigned to that element. It was given responsibility for many of the password safeguards that could fall under the security function. The Internal Control element is one of the most important security control functions as is the Audit function. The 88 safeguards are listed in Table 1. Their order of listing is based on the safeguard model, with General Management safeguards first and those from Operations in Data Processing last. Within each organizational element category, the detection safeguards appear before prevention safeguards. An attempt has been made to list the highest ranking safeguards first within a given category. A "D" entry in the table indicates that the associated safeguard has some capability for detecting misuses in that vulnerability category. Similarly, a "P" entry indicates that the safeguard has some capability to prevent misuses in the indicated vulnerability category. Appendix B contains formatted descriptions of each of the safeguards. Safeguards in Appendix B are listed in the same order as they appear in Table 1. Safeguard Rankings Table 2 provides a list of the top 25 ranked detection safeguards within vulnerability categories, and Table 3 provides a similar list for the top 31 ranked prevention safeguards. Only those safeguards that were ranked in the top five on the basis of effectiveness for one of the vulnerability categories were included. A "1" entry in Table 2 or 3 indicates that the associated safeguard was deemed to be the most effective safeguard against the specified vulnerability category. As an example, for the vulnerability category in Table 2, Internal Program Disclosure, the five most effective detection safeguards, listing the most effective one first are: 12RANK DETECTION SAFEGUARD 1 User Command Log 2 Sensitive File Access Log 3 Operator Console Log 4 Media Usage Log 5 Computer Resource Usage Audit It should be pointed out that not all vulnerability categories in either Tables 2 or 3 contain five ranked safeguards (e.g., the Computer Equipment and Supplies/Modification category in Table 3) The reason . for this is that some vulnerability categories have fewer than five safeguards deemed effective. One caution is indicated in interpreting Tables 2 and 3. The safeguards are ranked only within a given vulnerability category and can be considered valid over a reasonable range of installations. As previously mentioned, rankings, to some degree, are dependent on environment. For Tables 2 and 3 comparisons between vulnerability cate- gories are meaningless. Tables 4 and 5 provide lists of safeguards ranked across all vulnerability categories. Table 4 presents the eight most effective detection safeguards, and Table 5 presents the eight most effective prevention safeguards. For example. Table 5 indicates that on a consensus basis. Application System Design Verification is the most effective prevention safeguard and Data Center Access Control is ranked fifth. Great care must be exercised in interpreting Tables 4 and 5. They are based on assumptions of limited validity at best. To arrive at a consensus, an assumption was made that all vulner- ability categories are of equal importance. It is unlikely, however, that this assumption is completely true for any given installation, and for some it may have no validity. Another assumption made was that all of the safeguards are of the same degree of generality. The very general safeguards tend to receive a higher consensus score than the specific safeguards even though it may not be possible to implement the general safeguards completely, and their implementation is likely to be more expensive. In Table 4, Operations Area Surveillance is the highest ranked safeguard. If a single general audit safeguard had been used instead of 15 more specific safeguards, almost certainly the single audit would have ranked first. 13^ ' ' ' ' ' ' ' O o o 00 Oi Ul Ul • (a D ro 3 era! rati Sa h0 > r O 3-) t "t T - HO 3 W c r3 o n r- 0o H£ r fm m > C0U Dr - bOc c e E f C> rQ tn u r)r ! M l> r iO 3 H n l3 H 3 l-- ) i ur- ( -hI C3 Ha O r > C a rD f: t ri -" . O (0 0 rU h n D > C a H 0N r CO r a"D i /) > 1r r- . i' l-c H n 3 C> Q r c o r n > a (o 1)r r- ). r -0o H CO c> r0- r'T 0o 3 C r (n 7 n c e H n ( wo D (3 00 n) B J Dr J C H r r 3 c 0a 1 f r O r 0- D n 1 1r rr r- " 3 OC f h t r n a > r f 0 Pc Q rt/ D - D ) ( 1r ! r. > -i * 030 0 0 f 3 cO r > C r0) 1 1 —r ru n 3 0C f f r f a r 0 0 f r hO 3 > C C-/ 1 *D D D 3 ^3r r1. Ll -Xo C f o o 0 r H c 3 CO > C rJD n1 | r-L Lv> C c r 0 iC r r 0 t f h C c 0: - 1 /1 D - 3r —i 'drL 1*vC C H r X f3 O> t F r C f C 7 f o n C: D D Dr r- d 3L r LL L c0 i fH M 3 r fn r 0o f O 0 rn= D tD 3 D 3r r0 ! i Oc 3> C C H f c O 3 0 f n 3oOnD n 3 DL L ' C fn cH r/ :D r3 1M 3 C Cr O r r O 0 r 0 ^3 1 1r r r r O 3o r Or L X 3r f r 0 ( C f3 c < fr/ D n DD ( 3r —n r^ O 30 r PO tIr —o- M 3 C r O r 1 r O r 0P = 3r r r r- Tt3 O C 0 0r r r a r3- 1 1r r r rH M 3 e Cr O r C r a 0 0f-3 1r rr r" T3h H C O 3 C e c 3r r r o fa J r -- r r r r^ M r C <i L 3O 0 1 p fC3 - D3'Ta O> 1 H O H0 r O 3 r r r3 O -3 l— r* - ig 3W X r f r 0 O 0 r ? f cD i 3 D3 nr r 00H HS 0 h3 c c o 3 Or f0' -3 n D- * r -- i o 3 c < c 3a on n T v3W O3 : r f f c 3 3o f t-D n D —<d HO c fn <c r > o0n Dn1 r' C Ho a o r 0 r O 3- 1r r '-H > C c c r 3 f3 nrn Dr rL OS 03 0 f 33 f rO3 3 D D r ) <h f c 0 r C c o0 :D 3 ih L r l t- oi - oTi c Q" . rr HO- n roi O < H> O < r0r ? 3 n o o 3 u H r H 3s r- - H rr- 3 3o r rOlr t— f (33 rD D r f 0 o c> n CD 1 nD f3 (3 rD D r0H 0 f01 D r rOlr T H 33 0 f col -3 ni* 00 cn O o O a a h3 a r4 fx) O O a e3 a IS u a a o D o o a o o •TJ ItJ •tJ HQ '~d is: a 1^ 1^ O O D O O i-Q u IS •T) "TJ ^3 rfl IS jtn "ao jc 3n p^ c |H 3 141 Cm o a a a cucm a. cuohcucu HI (X, a o o a 0-.P-I D-i ci<(i<PhDli HI Q Q PU P-i Pm P-, Q Q PL| CM CM D3 e. tC o SI Q a CM d on CM SI a a Q Q CM SI Cm Cm Cm o o o Q CM CM CM CM CM Cm CM CM CM 114 CM CM a o Q Q (l4 Cm P-i CM CM CM CM CM SI Pj CM CM o o O Q Q CM CM CM CM CM CM Cm CM CM CM CM CM CM CM o o a O Q CM CM Cm CM CM CM CM CM CM CM Cm CM a a O Q CM Cm Dj CM CM CM CM CM SI 11. |l4 Cm a a O Q Dj CM CM P-l CM CM CM CM CM CM CM 4J • o4 tO > C O-H oJ M U1 .^ < <C n Q I ;j J JO O o4C Co C 0 JO O) • 4 (o O-H > UHco6 CaO. O)4o u-J Q Xc C V> IU 4,n ^ CC0 C O MOO O0U C C cO*rO 1H w-t D c i < Coc n u JnOl o4< o0 ^ C Sc > C 3--); 11 LuC pfcu O> O qa, oXi C-< o ^ ol ) M-u 1J -i CC0 0 Cc MOe) O0 > D4-o ^ c i Ju1 : Co 444 o C C0 u 6C-- OJU Ott C <M • •444 rC o C D0o u C C a O r-- :- -O O) D 4) tI l ,<H C • •4 44 O CC 0 e C C > c O a-- :O H HJ O) D O tO t h CT T C C4C V C C Cu O o ^c e- N3 O MD O O 4O j O t O mHo • l4 44 o 6 C o C C Co u C c - -- H J O UO O tlt T C l44C C u QC l C c c C -C -D OJ O JO lO 4 O tU 4o u oc-t iu • o4 4o C < o oo t o c c E 3rc -- nO u4 4 Jt o M44 o C u Co c c c-J O U t o uC o u 0 C0 o c ) OO0 CM QH• 44 i o C C J C Cro u 3c - NM --J O O OO tll c< C• [ • 4( C> C C0 0 C C (u C C ^; OKH H JU O UUO O U J0 <r OCh 4o O lo C ( a-0 O ( C3 rJ -J J O U4U O i .0 i - ii DMO C ji C njU 1 MU4 O 0 O V aa o ia 6-O O 33- 1 -)44 t i0H T Z• C OC I < U O C C a 3C C 3 e 13H OM U OO OU O C • >H 4 4C V CO O ^3 - -O 4 U^t I 0o Cs PC• 444 C C oC 3o o C 0 1 oC - 0O- MM : J-H O UUU tt 1 CC• •• 4 C (C TO 1( C >0 Q O 3 M JH- O UH O ^U U) O 4, oa• •U4 1C O C >C o u O C C3- .- HUUU OO t 1O T CC0 4 C Ou o U O CU o s C C C C 0 C > cC - O3OJ O UU OO O O 1O 0 ^ iCa M • Q -C CO > NH HUU x 1 C cH oQ •1 4 4C u C 1 O< O C 3 e 3rO 3 3 U - : - - nO U 44u O 1 I1 O C4 o 3 C C CO CU C C3 3- MOO OU UOt • iC CC •4 u o 3 C1 CC C ( ^a C 3 3 i- MV nMO OO4O O U 4 t ML • S CC 44 Ctu 0 C e C C >O u O C 3 c3 -- OoJ O U Oo } OU 1t ,rI < • Co 44 tC o C3 eO u o C Cu C 3 33 -— - O: HoUU OO J Jt CC C4C oC O C 0 u3 - OM OOU U JO 0 Cr H CC •4 JC 0 C C (o 0 u-o u 3 O e 3 r MJJ ^O UU O4 40 • aC4 3 u CCu C^ O O O 3 :oO OJ U O. . •• S4 tO < V C3 uL0 3- oH oOu 44 t 1 aC • CH 4 44 t r C oC O a > o 3 ei- 3 -- :J -J Uo J tO4 )l . CM cNJro<fln^r^cocJ^ uCO ^ CNj m <r OCO 15( Cl, PL, CU P-( HI CL, PL, 3 C SI 6 SI SI oc Ml SI P-l CM a, P-t p., p^ p^ p-t p-( Pj ^OJ -o rJ oc Q C.4- >1 ,- nH j o4 oC-) <C CuO D ra ij <J C M H . O W TC O <C a U 0 O0O4C C-O OJ Q4 u0 3J3 ^SC C Q> OD J - *> c3 uH H n t -o >— i- Ji OCaU 14 C7- 2) L1 >O 33 -i fo c Og nn Q4o ( C CJu O C O-CM M O3 CMHO U 4O oC C -J 3 >, 3 J-i CtJ 4-J 4-1 H Qcn Cct- C4 On4o -)'> CHQPCo Oj4Cm O-l'> HCO4-t1-(CD CO wCoOo:T-l rO3 4 T g(3 U Mo3- MaC. H( C0 O1 X W40 XJ) <Q O0 JJ3 WC C/ U3. -O- HXi oJ COV MC4O'3 C'H d'a uW3 'M-3 uI M T• go- r Jl 4 O4J C C-J O Ul . -QC C— HfJ lI M xH4 0- :4 )l - OC d3HO i Vj r-i <t in 0) ^ cN in ^ 00 CT^ o ^ c^ S Q O H Q 16t ( 1 1 I 1 1 1 Hi C •H t— m C nCi SI CM ^J a! (U 4X-1 SI i-( CM CO i-l CM CO lO <) CO r-l <f LO m c-n1 LO SI M c CD 0 o0 ^S4 0 Tg 0 c rc- O1 o1 0 X• P u <•U 4 4 4U O e < o Ou u o 0 Cc O 0 e 3- - - I :i HH Ju ) O1 1 1x H Q• • 4o oc W > W CH H J j xu • i • • S4 1 ro d c 0 d C. r-; J - -J n O^ 41 1 l0 J XT X <c w •4 4V o o 0 0 0 X >c c 3- -2 )3 I Hr 1 1 );I 1 1^. J T <• • D r4 4rO r O 0 C-C 3 e > 3- 3 D :jH t- Ja J ) D41l iX < X• • o4 o oo C ^ Ca 03 c e- I : IHH / 4 D 11 D X TA • H V C• 4 44 o C C < < /c o C oC —- -- > u HH f D 5D U u1 11 l X 1 X• < • f Q4 40 C C C— f3 c 3- -! );H H D D D1 iJ 10• X• < < C4 4I <M < 0 0 /3 o-a IHJ D U u ) 1 51 x Xa f • <•4 4 4 4C C C d r 3- - -; I :HHJD iD O )1 1 1 X o• < o4 40 C C Q U O u 0 Q e o1 0 O 3 C 0 33 -- I i- )D O )1 O ) 11 0 .1 X j< J u•4 O O t Cu:3I cHJ o D:Oe X . - <•< •[ 4 43 o U t o 4o 3 e > 3i - - oI d1d H H2u< 1 1^Xt C X - • o•t 44r O 0 1 t ^ O 0a0 ) 3 cr- 3O I- ^Hw- a 1 D 4 J 1!1 J1 1li xo <•4 4 ro t a c3 - ::HJ ao1 . •4> - H1,r < O• c • 4 ru e D0 r 0> V C 0 1 C O-O 3 C -:n HH - a u) 4 D 1 O4) a 11 .. <<4 V r r 0ue 0 t > S —J j a o 11 o H • P0 t t 0O o u3 r 41o o40 Cu M 4n 4 O C Oo ^ o o 0> C 3 g3- JJt J4 11 Xr -t C • 04 -rg Q C > / r- 1Q 3loJ O ) 41 , r. Mo 44 rO ) o u 0 3— C c— --- o 11 11i .X —0 o r o u 1 tcI 11a o0• Ct H O4 41 Nr O r V r ro g tC+C -- J Jo oa a 4o411 rcA [ • •i • 4 t O1t O 0> 3Xt t C - n oHc -j H JoJ 14uo o J 11 -I Oo 4 do o o u o r 0 a0 0 t3— - -o 11 o 1 .0 tX o i PMO -o nJJ , 1 Mo Ji O ( o u ao u o o 0 o g- c c- 1 J1 i X .0 o• 4 r 0rt o ^ cc - J o )4o l xIX S•0 o O 0 r t t 0 —IHco o 1J0 0 • SOO 4V C3 -4 O1 1O CO— OI <4 4 t-J ul i -C- HDl O> < <c- u u< ot V (ao 4 U - <4- o1 f— CM CI in 00 tj> o .— .C —M 1 o 03 1 CM Q4r r-o a1 .-4 CM C/5 171 m c-i CO <3- CM cn m m HI .—1 cN <r Lo on u-i mm ,—) CM 0 CO0 OEJ 03 aS<& ( tc s c lu 0 ooI < •QO (Co c > Q CD : H0D J: O DO c o w ec mJ r fH Mio C O < Q O CC 6—J O J D J L •Q •Uo w o rc > r -nA l Q w• 4o C C C C C I O XC^ - Jn O O O O J^ iL . Q C • <OO O> 0 CM 0o J C O Co a C- e -m ;H-J ) O O1 Jl0 . L. O>O4u o < o U O O-O c g 3 U- Ju J11 f Q4( C CO d f JD O OiCOC Q II 4 4O C a c -c - -J j O I1 J •Co O MX 4 4 40 C C a ac- - - OJD D 1 ) t .• <O MO 4 44> CC C 3 C 3 C-- t- \ 1O O 1J LL uW W- -4 -Q C ^ QIM > C c Xr- o- uJ O 4 >^tI O V oCj <> Q c0 C Q Q o o pd e c 3nO J t p0 4-1 <o U Q4 aO U o C Qo o Q c Qc -: tJ )O J 1 T •I • Ou 4 rt o Q Q Q )0 X C c ujC -3 --Ho J ) Jj t l>0 < • H M4C Ct C 0 Qa E d u Q dc -H O O Jo O J t0 c4 4cU o Q Q Qo - Ja n l> Jt C XI CQ O> 3 >d - O OJJ I 14 ( aO 1 c o Q0-J 0 cJ1 0 POo U Qd rCJ)o ' Co aQ t o Q 0 I u cd V M- snJ o t Ixo C< C 0 r0O o V o Q0 ed d : uo D o4 t 00 0 u H t40 0 >d - it, Cu4 4o Q so u c E y- OJ J 1 <r •h4( Q o Co C CQO c d-- :f H0 J O) lt L LT- <C -•4 -O Co C CE Q t > d- I dO HH lO •J o1 L L, r .o MX4O O Cd u Q d—- d- JJ1 O4 t H iC oE M Q u o d:d OJ l 4 >4 C u Qo C -J O J1n J Cx T CF 4o C QU 0id »O: Je Jl O f •ru QO Q C Q>U - JJ J OlO ou •4 }o Q C 0 ( >d- -HUJ O tJ 0S T Cc Q0 ( o u C 0 o Qd] Otu J O J00 CG M H > QQU MJJ C1 ^ 4 4oHQ C Q ) O - -— C 3 O1- 1 1O J1 i • OUrC o C QCd - JO Di LCO Mu a4 4C C C ao 3 3 3 dd M- -O DJ t L CC O MQ 44 4C C C 3 3 CdO 3 O-O JJ O O1 LL \•Q Ho 4 Co Q Q> o W Qad 6 rJ OJ) J H.< C b' - J- C u Q Xr -u Q> Cd d - JO- Hu JO1 JOJ l Co o} d J-l o C4A e Q> d Q!0 Cd - O- J Jr J ii L 4 X SH 4 O II 0 U -d - III 1t DQQ J Io C OI d 3 - I EI JOi ou 0 0c) )CM oC <aO u (N X <4- I1 u QD ) <r CO Q4C -O t CO<r 24oQJJ 18Table 4 CONSENSUS RANKING: DETECTION SAPEGUARDS Ranking Security 1. Operations Area Surveillance 1 Internal Control 1. User Command Log 2 3. Sensitive File Access Log 3 2. Data Transformation 4 Security 2. Area Alarm System 5 Audit 5. Data Handling Audit 6 Internal Control 4. Operator Console Log 7 Audit 4. Selected Transaction Audit 8 Table 5 CONSENSUS RANKING: PREVENTION SAFEGUARDS Ranking Audit 16. Application System Design Verification 1 Application Interface 1. Application System Test 2 Personnel 1. Employee Termination Policy 3 Data Processing 3. Password Protection System 4 Security 3. Data Center Access Control 5 4. Fire Detection and Extinguishment 6 Data Handling 2. Input/Output Data Control 7 3. Input/Output Data Storage 8 19VII. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS This report provides a foundation for the development of a computer safeguard program directed toward the detection and prevention of intentional computer misuse. The definition of intentional computer misuse and the construction of an associated vulnerability taxonomy are believed to be comprehensive and complete. The safeguards described in the report were developed as a result of analysis of actual cases of computer misuse on record at SRI and other research organizations. The safeguards are ranked within each vulnerability category and across all categories, but the rankings are not absolute. Three final considerations are noteworthy. First, to develop a safeguard program, it is necessary to know what safeguards are required and who is responsible for their initiation or implemen- tation. In this report an organizational model for assigning responsi- bility is presented. Whereas the model provides a good classification scheme for this report, it requires additional work to show the interrelationships between general management, line management, and staff employees. The model indicates that all elements of an agency or organization have some responsibility for computer security, but it does not address the responsibilities of individuals. Secondly, it would be useful to have a comprehensive format to describe safeguards. In a review of an actual case of misuse, a specific safeguard that would prevent or detect that misuse can be conceived. When a new but similar case is reviewed, the same safeguard with slight modification is required. After twenty to thirty such reviews, one either has twenty specific but very similar safeguards or the tool description becomes somewhat general. In describing the safeguards, this report attempts to provide sufficient detail for the security specialist. Nonetheless, a comprehensive safeguard description format would allow many different organizations to report safeguards in a standard format. Thirdly, it is outside the scope of this report to describe different safeguard implementation strategies. A formal risk assess- ment must be performed as a necessary step in determining the safeguard implementation strategy for any particular environment. 20. Appendix A VULNERABILITY CATEGORY DEFINITIONS Following are definitions of the seventeen vulnerability categorie that make up the vulnerability taxonomy. Modification has been defined to include selective destruction in which the intent of the destruction is personal gain--e,g., destroying a record of a personal bill. De- struction has been restricted to include malicious acts in which the pr — intent was to cause damage e,g., throwing disk packs out the window. 1. Unauthorized Modification of Data Internal to the Computer System (DMI) Vulnerabilities include unauthorized modification of computer data residing within the computer system proper. Covered are insertion of new data and modification or deletion of existing data by using an application system, system programs, or system facilities. 2. Unauthorized Destruction of Data Internal to the Computer System (DDel) Vulnerabilities include unauthorized destruction of computer data residing within the computer system proper. Entailed is the intentional arbitrary destruction of existing data by using an application system, system programs, or system facilities 3. Unauthorized Disclosure of Data Stored Internal to the Computer System (DDil) Vulnerabilities include unauthorized disclosure of computer data residing within the computer system proper. Entailed is the disclosure to unauthorized persons of existing data ob- tained by using an application system, system programs, or system facilities. 4. Unauthorized Modification of Programs Internal to the Computer System (PMI) Vulnerabilities include unauthorized modification of programs residing within the computer system proper. Covered are in- sertion of new program modules and modification or deletion of existing programs by using an application system, system programs, or system facilities. -Al-. 5. Unauthorized Destruction of Programs Internal to the Computer System (PDel) Vulnerabilities include unauthorized destruction of programs residing within the computer system proper. Entailed is the intentional arbitrary destruction of existing programs by using an application system, system programs, or system facilities 6. Unauthorized Disclosure of Programs Stored Internal to the Computer System (PDil) Vulnerabilities include unauthorized disclosure of programs residing within the computer system proper. Entailed is the disclosure to unauthorized persons of existing programs ob- tained by using an application system, system programs, or system facilities. 7. Unauthorized Modification of Data External to the Computer System (DME) Vulnerabilities include unauthorized physical modification of computer data residing outside the computer system proper. Examples of misuse that might be committed during data origination, data preparation, or input handling are insertion of new data and modification or deletion of existing data. 8. Unauthorized Destruction of Data External to the Computer System (DDeE) Vulnerabilities include unauthorized physical destruction of computer data residing outside the computer system proper. Entailed is the intentional arbitrary destruction of data destined either as input to the system or output from the system, 9. Unauthorized Disclosure of Data Stored External to the Computer System (DDiE) Vulnerabilities include unauthorized disclosure of computer data residing outside the computer system proper. Entailed is the disclosure to unauthorized persons of data destined either as input to the system or output from the system. -A2-. 10. Unauthorized Modification of Programs External to the Computer System (PME) Vulnerabilities include unauthorized modification of programs residing outside the computer system proper. Covered are in- sertion of new program modules and modification or deletion of existing programs stored on cards, tapes, or disks, possibly by using outside computer facilities. 11. Unauthorized Destruction of Programs External to the Computer System (PDeE) Vulnerabilities include unauthorized destruction of programs residing outside the computer system proper. Entailed is the intentional arbitrary destruction of existing programs stored on cards, tapes, or disks, possibly by using outside computer facilities 12. Unauthorized Disclosure of Programs Stored External to the Computer System (PDiE) Vulnerabilities include unauthorized disclosure of programs residing outside the computer system proper. Entailed is the disclosure to unauthorized persons of existing programs stored on listings, cards, tapes, disks, or other storage media, possibly by using outside computer facilities. 13. Unauthorized Modification of Computer Equipment or Supplies (CE&SM) Vulnerabilities include unauthorized physical modification of computer system equipment or supplies. Covered are in- sertion of a new element, substitution of one element for another, and modification or deletion of an existing ele- ment with intent to benefit or for malicious reasons. 14. Unauthorized Destruction of Computer Equipment or Supplies (CE&SDe) Vulnerabilities include unauthorized physical destruction of computer system equipment and supplies. Entailed is intentional arbitrary destruction. -A3-. 15. Theft of Computer Equipment or Supplies (CE&ST) Vulnerabilities include theft of computer system equip- ment or supplies with intent to benefit or for malicious reasons 16. Unauthorized Use of Computer System Services (SST) Vulnerabilities include the unauthorized use of any computer system services or resources. 17. Denial of Computer System Services (SSD) Vulnerabilities include the denial of computer system services to authorized users. Entailed is the intentional denial of system services. -A4-Appendix B FORMATTED SAFEGUARD DESCRIPTIONS Each of the 88 safeguards is described in this appendix. They are listed in the same order as they are presented in Table 1. The CATEGORY descriptor identifies the organizational element responsible for the safeguard. The COMMENTS descriptor indicates whether the safeguard must be designed into the system or environment or whether retrofit is possible. In some instances, the COMMENTS section contains additional information believed to be useful in understanding special characteristics of the safeguard. For convenience the last page of this appendix contains an alpha- betized listing of all vulnerability category abbreviations with associated meanings. -Bl-:; :: : NAME: Adjustment/Correction Reporting CATEGORY: General Management 1 DESCRIPTION: Policy, procedures, and software to provide reports of adjustment/correction transactions covering the sphere of influence for each manager. For example, any modification, updates, deletions, or other changes to the payroll master file should be re- ported regularly to the manager of payroll systems for his information and action. PURPOSE To detect unauthorized modification of data. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES DMI DME , COMMENTS Retrofit NAME: Job Rotation CATEGORY: General Management 2 DESCRIPTION: Policy and procedures to periodically rotate those positions that have a great deal of authority among individuals in the data handling process. For example the position responsible for address , changes should be assumed by new persons period- ically and without notice. The new person's first responsibility would be to verify the integrity of the file. PURPOSE To detect unauthorized modification of data, APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES: DME COMMENTS Retrofit -B2-NAME: Disaster Avoidance CATEGORY: General Management 3 DESCRIPTION: Policy that facilities, both central and remote, are to be designed and constructed (or modified) so as to provide maximum protection against natural disasters and against persons intent on destroy- ing physical or intellectual property. Documents, such as Guidelines for Automatic Data Processing Physical Security and Risk Management, FIPS PUB 31, can be used to assess the vulnerability to natural disasters. PURPOSE: To prevent unauthorized destruction of data, programs, system equipment, or supplies. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES: DDeE PDeE CE&SDe , , COMMENTS: Although this safeguard is important even after facilities have been constructed and occupied, it is of greater value when planning new facilities. NAME: Employee Termination Policy CATEGORY: Personnel 1 DESCRIPTION: Policy and procedures to effect immediate restric- tion of terminated employee's access to sensitive material and areas. The intent of this safeguard is to ensure that disgruntled terminated employees are not in the position to destroy or disclose facilities or information. PURPOSE: To prevent destruction (or denial) of data, programs, equipment, or services and unauthorized disclosure of data and programs. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES: DDil PDel PDil, DDeE, DDiE, DDel PDeE, PDiE, , , , CS&EDe, SSD COMMENTS: Retrofit; There were numerous cases in the file in which disgruntled employees destroyed data, programs, or equipment after their termination notice but before their actual departure. -B3-:: :: : . NAME: Mailing List Check CATEGORY: Operations Division 1 DESCRIPTION: Policy and procedures to insert dummy names with known addresses into mailing lists. Receipt of mail at these addresses will indicate that the mailing list is being misused. This will detect unauthorized disclosure of sensitive internal lists PURPOSE To detect unauthorized disclosure and usage of sensitive internal use only mailing lists. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES DDil, DDiE COMMENTS Retrofit NAME: External Data Responsibility Separation CATEGORY: Operations Division 2 DESCRIPTION; Policy and procedure to ensure that functions at critical points in the data-handling process are carried out by different individuals. For example, the same person should not handle address changes and establishment of new accounts. PURPOSE To prevent unauthorized modification of data. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES: DME COMMENTS Retrofit -B4-.:: :: : . NAME: Personal Record Access Check CATEGORY: Application Program Development 1 (Operations Division) DESCRIPTION: Procedures and software to monitor and log access of users to their own records. For example^ software can be added to the application program that maintains a list of authorized users with personal records in the file. Each time one of these persons accesses the file, a record is sent to the log and reviewed by appropriate personnel. For files such as payroll, the program will have to ascertain whether or not the person has access to his or her data; if so, additional programming may be required. PURPOSE To detect unauthorized modification of data. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES: DMI, DME COMMENTS Retrofit NAME: Record Volume Control CATEGORY: Application Program Development 2 (Operations Division) DESCRIPTION: Procedures and software to require specification and checking of I/O record volume by programs. For example, application systems should have control points where input/output record counts are reconciled before the next job step is initiated PURPOSE To prevent unauthorized modification of data. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES DMI DME , COMMENTS Retrofit -B5-:; :: . NAME: Terminal Log-off CATEGORY: Application Program Development 3 (Operations Division) DESCRIPTION: Software to provide automatic log-off of a terminal that has been idle for a specified time interval. The length of time will vary with the type of system and terminal access controls in use. PURPOSE To prevent unauthorized modification, destruction, or disclosure of intellectual property or denial or theft of service or process. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES: DMI, DDel, DDil, PMI PDel PDil SST, SSD , , , COMMENTS Retrofit NAME: I/O Volume Count Comparison CATEGORY: Data Handling 1 (Operations Division) DESCRIPTION: Procedures and software to ensure that users compare I/O volume against predicted requirements. For example, the person responsible for making modifications to the payroll file should be re- quired to predict the number of records to be changed and verify that exactly this number was changed PURPOSE To detect unauthorized destruction, disclosure (or theft) of data or programs. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES: DDel DDil PDel PDil , , , COMMENTS Retrofit -B6-;; ;:: : . . NMTE: I/O Data Control CATEGORY Data Handling 2 (Operations Division) Operations 2 (Data Processing) DESCRIPTION: Procedures to ensure that specific control points exist for data movement throughout the user area. The intent is to provide for traceability and accountability PURPOSE To prevent unauthorized modification or disclosure of data or programs. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES DME, DDiE, PME, PDiE COMMENTS Retrofit; The most numerous incidents of misuse identified are in the data-handling areas outside the computer system. Each organization has to develop specific control points that are meaningful within the context of its environment. NAME: I/O Data Storage CATEGORY: Data Handling 3 (Operations Division) Operations 3 (Data Processing) DESCRIPTION: Procedures and facilities to provide lockable storage for sensitive data, programs, and reports. This safeguard is not directed at government classified material. PURPOSE To prevent unauthorized modification, destruction, or disclosure of data or programs APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES: DME, DDeE, DDiE, PME, PDeE, PDiE COMMENTS Retrofit; In a large number of cases, had safes or other lockable storage been used, not only would much of the data disclosure problem been solved, but much of the data and program destruction problem would have been reduced. -B7-:::: : NAME: I/O Data Movement Control CATEGORY: Data Handling 4 (Operations Division) DESCRIPTION: Procedures to use transmittal slips to effect positive controls (such as traceability) over data being moved between user areas and the computer center. PURPOSE To prevent unauthorized modification or disclosure of data or programs. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES DME, DDiE, PME PDiE , COMMENTS Retrofit NAME: External Sensitive Area Access Control CATEGORY: Data Handling 5 (Operations Division) Operations 5 (Data Processing) DESCRIPTION: Procedures and facilities to deny or control unauthorized personnel access to sensitive user work areas. The intent of this safeguard is to ensure that a minimum number of people have access to user work areas where they might be able to change records that are in a format they understand, PURPOSE To prevent unauthorized modification, destruction or disclosure of data or programs. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES: DME, DDeE, DDiE, PME, PDeE, PDiE COMMENTS Retrofit -B8-:: :: :: NAME: I/O Data Movement Security CATEGORY: Data Handling 6 (Operations Division) DESCRIPTION: Procedures and facilities to provide lockable containers for moving data and output between user areas and the computer center or remote entry stations. PURPOSE To prevent unauthorized modification or disclosure of data. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES DME, DDiE COMMENTS Retrofit NAME: Address Change Control CATEGORY: Data Handling 7 (Operations Division) DESCRIPTION: Procedures to provide special controls over receipt and validation of address change data. Of specific interest are addresses to which checks or other sensitive documents are sent. A large number of cases involved the establishment of ficticious companies and changing the accounts payable system to send checks to that company. Usually the system was not actually modified, but rather false entries were introduced by authorized users. PURPOSE To prevent unauthorized modification of data. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES DME COMMENTS Retrofit -B9-:: :: :: . NAME: User Interface Data Control CATEGORY: Data Handling 8 (Operations Division) DESCRIPTION: Procedures to provide for special controls such , as brief memoranda, over receipt and validation of data supplied directly by third parties, outside the normal procedures. The intent of this safe- guard is to prevent persons such as programmers from calling the operator to change or fix programs in emergency situations without proper documentation, PURPOSE To prevent unauthorized modification of data. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES DME COMMENTS Retrofit NAME: Audit by Extended Records CATEGORY: Audit 1 DESCRIPTION: Procedures and software to enable application programs to append audit information to the transaction record, thus providing a complete audit trail contained as a part of the transaction, For example, a billing transaction might have recorded items such as: • A reason code for credits or adjustments • A code to indicate whether it was a back-ordered item • A code to indicate whether pricing was special and who authorized it PURPOSE To detect unauthorized modification of data. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES DMI, DME COMMENTS Difficult to retrofit into existing application systems -BIO-:: :: NAME: Audit by Parallel Simulation CATEGORY: Audit 2 DESCRIPTION: Procedures and software to process production transactions with programs that simulate critical aspects of application system logic and to verify selected processing functions by comparing simulation results to production processing results. For example, a bank simulates savings interest cal- culations for all of its passbook savings customers. Since the simulation program verifies only the interest accrual calculations, it is much less complex than the passbook update application system. PURPOSE To detect unauthorized modification of programs. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES: PMI, PME COMMENTS Retrofit NAME: Code Comparison Audit CATEGORY: Audit 3 DESCRIPTION: Procedures and software to compare two source programs, one of which is a control program, and identify differences. After this comparison, the auditor verifies that differences have been authorized by appropriate personnel and are properly documented. PURPOSE To detect unauthorized modification of programs. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES: PMI, PME COMMENTS Retrofit -Bll-: :: . . . NAME: Selected Transaction Audit CATEGORY: Audit 4 DESCRIPTION: Procedures and software to allow audit subroutines to execute with, but independent of, application systems to screen and select for later review any transactions of interest. The kinds of trans- actions to be selected are determined by a set of input parameters at the time the audit subroutines are exercised. PURPOSE To detect unauthorized modification of data. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES :' DMI, DME COMMENTS Difficult to retrofit into existing application systems; many of the misuses associated with financial systems would have been detected in the early stages had this safeguard been in use and used regularly. NAME: Data Handling Audit CATEGORY: Audit 5 DESCRIPTION: Procedures to conduct a periodic audit of the data preparation process. The audit verifies confor- mance to controls dictated by policies, standards, and procedures PURPOSE To detect unauthorized modification, destruction, gr disclosure of data or nonconformance to standards APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES: DME, DDeE, DDiE COMMENTS Retrofit; Since the data handling area offers the most potential for misuse, it requires special audits of conformance to standard operating procedures -B12-:::: : NAME: Selected Area Audit CATEGORY: Audit 6 DESCRIPTION: Procedures and software to collect and evaluate selected operating statistics to identify unexpected variations, such as a high level of uncollected receivables. Actual values collected are compared with predicted values. PURPOSE To detect unauthorized modification of data. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES DMI, DME COMMENTS Retrofit NAME: Audit with Test Data CATEGORY: Audit 7 DESCRIPTION: Procedures and software to execute application systems, such as payroll or accounts payable, using test data sets to verify accuracy of systems by comparing actual processing results with predetermined test results. This safeguard is used mostly with batch systems. PURPOSE To detect unauthorized modification of programs. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES: PMI, PME COMMENTS Retrofit -B13-;: :: : NAME: Computer Resource Usage Audit CATEGORY: Audit 8 DESCRIPTION: Procedures and software to select, extract, and analyze computer resource usage information and compare it against projected usage budget. Analysis is performed at the organization, organizational subdivision, and user levels. For example a specific project may be budgeted , for 2-3 hours of terminal usage during any week. If one week the project uses 7-10 hours, a check should be made to ensure that there is a valid reason for the extra usage. PURPOSE To detect unauthorized disclosure (or theft) of data, programs or services. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES: DDil, PDil, SST COMMENTS Retrofit NAME: Crash Log Audit CATEGORY: Audit 9 DESCRIPTION: Procedures and software to collect and analyze system crash information for trends and evidence of intentional crashing. The intent is to ensure that a program exists for verifying that all system outages are explainable. PURPOSE To detect denial of system service. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES SSD COMMENTS Retrofit -B14-:::: :: NAME: Audit by Computer-Aided Flowcharting CATEGORY: Audit 10 DESCRIPTION: Procedures and software to process application systems to automatically identify and present logic paths and control points. The flowcharts produced are then compared with those provided by the programmer to identify inconsistencies. PURPOSE To detect unauthorized modification of programs. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES PMI, PME COMMENTS Retrofit NAME: Generalized Audit Software CATEGORY: Audit 11 DESCRIPTION: Procedures and software to access, extract, manipulate, and present data and test results in a format appropriate to internal audit objectives A number of generalized audit software packages are commercially available that offer various degrees of sophistication. PURPOSE To detect unauthorized modification of data. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES DMI, DME COMMENTS Retrofit -B15-;::: NAME: Snapshot Audit CATEGORY: Audit 12 DESCRIPTION: Procedures and software to be embedded in application systems that allow for recording the contents of main memory at critical decision points within the application process. The intent of this safeguard is to allow the auditor an opportunity to examine logic paths during execution of the program. PURPOSE To detect unauthorized modification of programs. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES: PMI, PME COMMENTS Retrofit NAME: Audit from Terminal CATEGORY: Audit 13 DESCRIPTION: Procedures and software to allow the ADP auditor to access, extract, manipulate, and display on-line data base information using a remote terminal. This tjrpe of safeguard is essentially the generalized audit software safeguard (Audit 11) for use in auditing on-line systems. PURPOSE To detect unauthorized modification of data. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES: DMI, DME COMMENTS Retrofit -B16-:: :: :: . . NAME: Library Usage Audit CATEGORY: Audit 14 DESCRIPTION: Procedures and software to record and review the number of references to sensitive library modules by each application system or user and to verify the reasonableness of these entries. For example, if a user requests a specific tape more often than usual during a given time span, the auditor should verify that the requests were in accord with the user's work requirements. PURPOSE To detect unauthorized modification or disclosure of data or programs APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES DMI, DDil, PMI, PDil, DME, DDiE PME, PDiE , COMMENTS Retrofit NAME: Late Processing Audit CATEGORY: Audit 15 DESCRIPTION: Procedures and software to collect additional information on all jobs that are completed after their due dates and times. The intent of the audit is to ensure that control guidelines are not com- promised as a consequence of the late processing. PURPOSE To detect unauthorized modification of data or programs APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES DMI, PMI, DME, PME COMMENTS Retrofit -B17-:::: :: NAME: Application System Design Verification CATEGORY: Audit 16 DESCRIPTION: Procedures, software, and guidelines to ensure that ADP auditors verify the quantity and quality of internal controls specified by the user depart- ments for inclusion in all new application systems. The verification should take place both before and after installation. PURPOSE To prevent all defined misuses. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES All COMMENTS Retrofit; This safeguard is the highest ranking prevention tool because it is believed that a very large number of misuses would have been prevented had organizations designed controls into the application system and taken steps to ensure that the controls were adequate and working before the system was declared operational. NAME: Operations Area Surveillance CATEGORY: Security 1 DESCRIPTION: Procedures and facilities to effect continuous surveillance of terminal and computer center at all times and of terminal areas during off-hours. Closed circuit TV (CCTV) can be used either manned or with video tape recording. PURPOSE To detect unauthorized modification, destruction, and disclosure (or theft) of data, programs, system equipment, or supplies. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES DME, DDeE, DDiE PME PDeE, PDiE, CE&SM, CE&SDe, , , CE&ST COMMENTS Retrofit; This safeguard was the highest ranking detection tool because of the large number of incidents in which an employee or perpetrator destroyed facilities, data or programs left in unmonitored areas. -B18-NAME: Area Alarm System CATEGORY: Security 2 DESCRIPTION: Software and facilities that provide for an alarm system to detect and record access to all critical areas, such as terminal room, supply room and computer center. Commercially available mini- computer-based systemsprovide an example. PURPOSE: To detect unauthorized modification of data, programs, or system equipment; destruction of data, programs, system equipment, or supplies; and disclosure (or theft) of data, programs, system equipment, or supplies. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES: DME DDeE DDiE PME, PDeE, PDiE, CSSsEM, , , , CS&EDe, CS&ET COMMENTS: Retrofit; Many cases exist in which perpetrators were allowed access to areas where they should not have been, but no one had the ability to detect their presence -B19-:::: . < NAME: Data Center Access Control CATEGORY: Security 3 DESCRIPTION: Procedures to restrict and control access to the data center including an authorized access list and a log for all entering and leaving the data center. Aspects of this safeguard may be automated using devices such as man-traps or badge readers. PURPOSE To prevent unauthorized modification, destruction, or theft of system equipment or supplies and denial of system service. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES: CESsSM, CE&SDe, CE&ST, SSD COMMENTS Retrofit; In many cases, equipment was destroyed by demonstrators who were able to easily gain access to computer facilities or by persons who should not have been allowed in the center, even though they were employees of the company. NAME: Fire Detection and Extinquishment CATEGORY: Security 4 DESCRIPTION: Procedures and facilities to provide fire detection and extinquishment protection for all computer and user areas PURPOSE To prevent destruction of data, programs, computer equipment, supplies and services. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES: DDeE, PDeE, CE&SDe, SSD COMMENTS Retrofit is possible, albeit with some difficulty; A number of fire bombings during the late 1960's caused extensive fire damage to unprotected centers -B20-;: ::: : . , NAME: Internal Tampering Alarms CATEGORY Security 5 DESCRIPTION: Facilities to provide terminals and other remote devices with internal tampering alarms including , alarms against unplugging. This safeguard is an extension of safeguard Security 2, Area Alarm Sj^stem. PURPOSE To prevent unauthorized modification or theft of terminals and other such equipment. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES CE&SM, CE&ST COMMENTS Difficult safeguard to apply without replacing terminals NAME: Metal Detector CATEGORY: Security 6 DESCRIPTION: Procedures and facilities to provide for metal detection at the entrance to the computer center and remote computing facilities. PURPOSE To prevent destruction or theft of system equipment or supplies APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES: CE&SDe, CE&ST COMMENTS Retrofit -B21-:: ::: NAME: X-Ray Surveillance CATEGORY Security 7 DESCRIPTION: Procedures and facilities to allow for X-ray of all packages, brief cases, tool boxes, and Other such items leaving areas in which sensitive material is stored. PURPOSE To prevent disclosure of data or programs and theft of system equipment. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES: DDiE, PDiE, CE&ST COMMENTS Retrofit NAME: Package Control CATEGORY: Security 8 DESCRIPTION: Procedures and facilities to provide for outgoing package control leaving areas in which sensitive material is stored, such as the tape and disk pack storage area. (This safeguard may be used in place of an X-ray machine.) PURPOSE To prevent unauthorized disclosure (or theft) of data, programs, computer equipment, or supplies. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES: DDiE, PDiE, CE&ST COMMENTS Retrofit -B22-;::: :: NAME: Off-site Storage CATEGORY: Security 9 DESCRIPTION: Procedures and facilities to effect secure off-site storage for copies of critical data files, programs, and documentation. PURPOSE To prevent denial of system service. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES SSD COMMENTS Retrofit NAME: Computer Inventory Control CATEGORY: Data Processing 1 DESCRIPTION: Procedures and software to effect inventory control of computer equipment, hardware replacement parts, unused media, and supplies, at all locations from arrival to end of useful life. The intent is to ensure a complete and consistent inventory control program that provides the auditor with sufficient information to verify the status of all inventory. PURPOSE To detect modification or theft of system equipment and supplies. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES CE85SM, CE&ST COMMENTS Retrofit -B23-:: :: : . NAME: Bill Back System CATEGORY: Data Processing 2 DESCRIPTION: Policy, procedures, and software to provide an accounting system for billing back all usage to the user organization. Costs should be broken out by department, project and person. To the extent possible, costs should be compared with budget projections. PURPOSE To detect unauthorized use of system services. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES: SST COMMENTS Retrofit NAME: Password Protection System CATEGORY: Data Processing 3 DESCRIPTION: Policy, procedures, software, and facilities to provide a comprehensive password protection system to include compartmented initiation, disbursement, storage, and change of passwords. This information should be secured using safes, encryption, and other such means PURPOSE To prevent unauthorized modification of data or programs; destruction (or disruption) of data, programs, or services; and disclosure (or theft) of data, programs, or services. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES DMI, DDel DDil, PMI PDel PDil SST, SSD , , , , COMMENTS Can be retrofit but with the degree of difficulty dependent on the organization size and usage of computers; While password systems were used in most organizations, they were used very poorly, i.e., passwords were never changed or were stored in clear text formats making it easy for a person to obtain the password. -B24-:: :: . NAME: Program Change Control Log CATEGORY: Data Processing 4 DESCRIPTION: Procedures and software to effect complete control over program changes. Included are change logs and documentation as well as formal approval procedures PURPOSE To prevent unauthorized modification of programs. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES: PMI PME , COMMENTS Retrofit NAME: Utility Control CATEGORY: Data Processing 5 DESCRIPTION: Policy, procedures, and software to identify and control the use of specific system utilities that can bypass system integrity controls. PURPOSE To prevent unauthorized modification of data or programs and denial of system services. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES: DMI, DDel, DDil PMI, PDel PDil SSD , , , COMMENTS Retrofit -B25-:: :; : . NAME: Application System Test CATEGORY: Application Interface 1 (Data Processing/System Control) DESCRIPTION: Procedures, software, and guidelines to ensure thorough testing of application systems before operational status is acquired. Test items include internal controls, programming standard conventions, errors of omission and commission as well as recovery capability. PURPOSE To prevent application system failure. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES: DMI, DDel, DDil, PMI PDel PDil, SSD, SST , , COMMENTS Retrofit; A number of misuses identified were a result of improperly tested systems. This was especially true in the university environment where students found ways to crash the system. NAME: Program Standards CATEGORY: Application Interface 2 (Data Processing/System Control) DESCRIPTION: Procedures and software to ensure that all programs use accepted agency programming standards that might include items such as register conventions, standard parameter conventions and such. PURPOSE To prevent unauthorized modification or disclosure of data or programs APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES DMI, DDel, DDil, PMI, PDel, PDil, SST, SSD COMMENTS Retrofit -B26-;: :: : . . NAME: Test Isolation Control CATEGORY: Application Interface 3 (Data Processing/System Control) DESCRIPTION: Procedures, software, and hardware to isolate test systems from production systems test data from , live data, at all times. This isolation is accom- plished by using hardware and software configuration controls. PURPOSE To prevent unauthorized modification or disclosure of data. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES DMI, DDil COMMENTS Retrofit NAME: Internal Standard Label Control CATEGORY: Application Interface 4 (Data Processing/System Control) DESCRIPTION: Procedures and software to ensure that application systems use standard labels for tapes, disks, and other removable media, to avoid bypassing system controls PURPOSE To prevent unauthorized modification or disclosure of data or programs APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES: DMI, DDil, PMI, PDil COMMENTS Retrofit -B27-:: :: NAME: Documentation Control CATEGORY: Application Interface 5 (Data Processing/System Control) DESCRIPTION: Procedures, software, and facilities to control access to system and application documentation, stored in any format or medium. PURPOSE To prevent denial or theft of system service. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES: SST, SSD COMMENTS Retrofit NAME: User Command Log CATEGORY: Internal Control 1 (Data Processing/System Control) DESCRIPTION: Procedures and software to enable logging of user commands. The organization should establish application system standards that would require a selective logging capability for user commands. PURPOSE To detect unauthorized actions and monitor command activity by users. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES: DMI, DDel, DDil, PMI PDel PDil SSD, SST , , , COMMENTS Retrofit; Users should be restricted to the fewest number of commands necessary to accomplish their task. In addition, application systems should have the capability to identify what commands were executed by each user at any time. -B28-:; :: : , NAME: Data Transformation CATEGORY: Internal Control 2 (Data Processing/System Control) DESCRIPTION: Procedures and software that allow for storage of critical data elements in a slightly transformed format reversing the transformation before the data are used by application systems. PURPOSE To detect unauthorized disclosure of data, APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES: DDil DDiE , COMMENTS Retrofit; This safeguard ranked so high because it worked very well against a few specific cases in a vulnerability category with few cases. NAME: Sensitive File Access Log CATEGORY: Internal Control 3 (Data Processing/System Control) DESCRIPTION: Procedures and software to log all accesses either by system programs or application programs, to files designated "sensitive" by the security administrator. The intent is to ensure an extra level of protection for "sensitive" files. PURPOSE To detect unauthorized accesses to sensitive files and generally monitor file access activity. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES DMI, DDel, DDil, PMI PDel PDil, SSD SST , , , COMMENTS Retrofit; In many of the cases reviewed, "sensitive' files were protected in the same manner as "nonsensitive" files. -B29-:: :: . NAME: Operator Console Log CATEGORY: Internal Control 4 (Data Processing/System Control) DESCRIPTION: Procedures and software to log specified commands issued at the operator console. For example, all privileged commands that allow modification of programs and/or data in main memory should be monitored PURPOSE To detect unauthorized actions and to monitor command activity at the operator console. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES: DMI, DDel, DDil, PMI PDel PDil SSD SST , , , , COMMENTS Retrofit NAME: IPL Check CATEGORY: Internal Control 5 (Data Processing/System Control) DESCRIPTION; Procedures and software for use at initial program load (IPL) time to compare current system libraries against verified baseline system. Checksum programs that perform a special algorithm on each module are an example. PURPOSE To detect unauthorized modification of programs. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES: PMI PME , COMMENTS Retrofit -B30-;; :: : NAME: Improper Log-on Control CATEGORY: Internal Control 6 (Data Processing/System Control) DESCRIPTION; Procedures and software to detect repeated attempts to log-on. For example, after three or four unsuccessful log-on attempts, a message might be sent to the console operator or to the security administrator's console for appropriate action. PURPOSE To detect unauthorized modification of data or programs; destruction (or disruption) of data, programs, or services; and disclosure (or theft) of data, programs, or services. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES DMI, DDel, DDil, PMI PDel PDil SST, SSD , , , COMMENTS Retrofit NAME: Nonpassword Terminal User Verification CATEGORY: Internal Control 7 (Data Processing/System Control) DESCRIPTION: Procedures, software, and hardware to effect positive system verification of users at all terminals. Possible approaches include the use of ID cards and readers, handprint identifiers, or voice print identifiers. PURPOSE To prevent unauthorized modification, destruction, or disclosure of intellectual property or denial or theft of service or process. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES: DMI, DDel, DDil, PMI, PDel, PDil, SST, SSD COMMENTS Difficult safeguard to apply without replacing or upgrading terminals. -B31-:::: . NAME: Store and Fetch Protection CATEGORY: Internal Control 8 (Data Processing/System Control) DESCRIPTION: Software and hardware to effect store and fetch protection for both main and secondary storage. The intent of this safeguard is to confine the application system to its authorized storage areas PURPOSE To prevent unauthorized modification or disclosure of data or programs; or theft or denial of service or process. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES: DMI, DDel, DDil, PMI PDel PDil SSD, SST , , , COMMENTS Difficult to retrofit unless hardware capability is already present. NAME: Least Privilege Principle CATEGORY: Internal Control 9 (Data Processing/System Control) DESCRIPTION: Procedures and software to check privileged commands to ensure that privilege requested is authorized for that individual or process. This check might be accomplished through use of a special system authorization table. PURPOSE To prevent unauthorized modification or disclosure of data or programs. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES: DMI, DDil, PMI, PDil COMMENTS Retrofit -B32-: : :: : NAME: Privileged Use Controls CATEGORY: Internal Control 10 (Data Processing/System Control) DESCRIPTION: Procedures and software to ensure that a special password system exists for privileged users, such as operators or system programmers. For example, this system may allow for daily change of privileged use passwords. PURPOSE: To prevent unauthorized modification of data or programs; destruction (or disruption) of data, programs, or services; and disclosure (or theft) of data, programs, or services. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES: DMI, DDel, DDil, PMI PDel PDil SST, SSD , , , COMMENTS Retrofit NAME Secondary Storage Passwords CATEGORY: Internal Control 11 (Data Processing/System Control) DESCRIPTION: Procedures and software to enable password pro- tection for programs and sensitive data maintained on secondary storage. The intent of this safeguard is to add a second level of password protection. PURPOSE To prevent unauthorized modification, destruction, or disclosure of data or programs. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES DMI, DDel, DDil, PMI, PDel, PDil COMMENTS Retrofit -B33-:: ;: : . . NAME: Device ID CATEGORY: Internal Control 12 (Data Processing/System Control) DESCRIPTION: Software and hardware to make serial number ID of various equipment components accessible to programs. This is of special utility in pro- viding positive identification of terminals and devices interacting with an application system. PURPOSE To prevent unauthorized modification or disclosure of data or programs APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES: DMI, DDil, PMI, PDil COMMENTS Difficult to retrofit unless hardware capability is already present. NAME: Off-hour Terminal Disconnect CATEGORY: Internal Control 13 (Data Processing/System Control) DESCRIPTION: Procedures or software to disconnect unneeded communication lines from system during off hours PURPOSE To prevent unauthorized modification, destruction, or disclosure of intellectual property or denial or theft of service or process. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES DMI, DDel, DDil, PMI, PDel PDil, SST, SSD , COMMENTS Retrofit -B34-; ::: :: . NAME: Password Generation CATEGORY Internal Control 14 (Data Processing/System Control) DESCRIPTION: Procedures and software to ensure generation of passwords that are difficult to guess or determine programatically PURPOSE To prevent unauthorized modification of data or programs; destruction (or disruption) of data, programs, or services; and disclosure (or theft) of data, programs, or services. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES DMI, DDel, DDil, PMI PDel PDil SST, SSD , , , COMMENTS Retrofit NAME: Password Print Suppress CATEGORY: Internal Control 15 (Data Processing/System Control) DESCRIPTION: Procedures, software, and hardware to inhibit the display of passwords entered at a terminal by the user. In some cases, an underprint facility may be satisfactory. PURPOSE To prevent unauthorized modification, destruction, or disclosure of intellectual property or denial or theft of service or process. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES DMI, DDel, DDil, PMI, PDel, PDil, SST, SSD COMMENTS Retrofit -B35-:; :: : NAME: System Masquerade Control CATEGORY: Internal Control 16 (Data Processing/System Control) DESCRIPTION: Software and hardware to prevent a user from issuing system-like prompts to a terminal. The intent is to ensure that users are not able to obtain sensitive identification information from other users by masquerading as the system. PURPOSE To prevent unauthorized modification, destruction, or disclosure of intellectual property or denial or theft of service or process. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES: DMI, DDel DDil, PMI PDel PDil SST, SSD , , , , COMMENTS Retrofit NAME: Simultaneous Access Control CATEGORY: Internal Control 17 (Data Processing/System Control) DESCRIPTION: Software and hardware to prevent simultaneous access to data in modes that would allow un- authorized modification. For example^ a file should be lockable from the time a record is modified until appropriate control entries have been made in the master file and history file. PURPOSE To prevent unauthorized data modification. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES DMI COMMENTS Difficult to retrofit unless hardware capability is already present. -B36-:: :: :: , . NAME: Storage Purge CATEGORY: Internal Control 18 (Data Processing/System Control) DESCRIPTION: Procedures, software, and hardware to overwrite all types of storage after use for sensitive processing. The intent is to discourage scavenging through residue information on magnetic medium. PURPOSE To prevent unauthorized disclosure of data or programs APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES DDil, PDil COMMENTS Retrofit NAME: Processing Time Control CATEGORY: Internal Control 19 (Data Processing/System Control) DESCRIPTION: Procedures and software to check actual time of use against authorized time for the application. The intent is to restrict application systems to certain times of the day, month, or year for which it is authorized. PURPOSE To prevent unauthorized use or denial of system service APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES SST, SSD COMMENTS Retrofit -B37-:: :: : NAME: Hardware Monitors CATEGORY: Hardware Support 1 (Data Processing/System Control) DESCRIPTION: Procedures, software, hardware, and facilities to monitor channel usage by application system or location over time and match actual usage with predicted or historical usage records. PURPOSE To detect theft of system services. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES SST COMMENTS Retrofit NAME: Remote Encryption Capability CATEGORY: Hardware Support 2 (Data Processing/System Control) DESCRIPTION: Software, hardware, and/or facilities to provide encryption capability for storing and processing sensitive data at remote data processing facilities, This capability must be consistent with the encryption mechanisms in use at the central facility. PURPOSE To prevent unauthorized disclosure of data. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES: DDiE COMMENTS Retrofit -B38-;: :: NAME: Encryption for Transport CATEGORY: Hardware Support 3 (Data Processing/System Control) DESCRIPTION: Software and facilities to encrypt data that are to be transported by a third party outside the computer facility. PURPOSE To prevent unauthorized disclosure of data. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES: DDiE COMMENTS Retrofit NAME: Communication Encryption CATEGORY: Hardware Support 4 (Data Processing/System Control) DESCRIPTION: Software and hardware to provide encryption of information passing over communication lines. Of particular interest is transmission of data over low-speed lines between terminal and computer, PURPOSE To prevent unauthorized disclosure of data. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES: DDil COMMENTS Retrofit is possible, but difficult. -B39-:; :: NAME: Alternate Communication Paths CATEGORY: Hardware Support 5 (Data Processing/System Control) DESCRIPTION: Hardware and facilities to ensure that alternative communication paths exist for critical on-line systems. For example, ensure duplicate paths exist between the computer facility and the telephone company central office. PURPOSE To prevent denial of system service. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES: SSD COMMENTS Retrofit is possible but with difficulty and expense. NAME: Media Usage Log CATEGORY: Operations 1 (Data Processing) DESCRIPTION: Procedures to log all movement and usage of removable, sensitive media, possibly using controlled external labels and times of the mount and dismount by job and user. PURPOSE To detect unauthorized modification or disclosure of data or programs or unauthorized use. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES: DMI, DDel DDil, PMI PDel PDil SST , , , , COMMENTS Retrofit -B40-:: :: : . NAME: I/O Data Control CATEGORY: Operations 2 (Data Processing) Data Handling 2 (Operations Division) DESCRIPTION: Procedures to ensure that specific control points exist for data movement throughout the user area. The intent is to provide for traceability and accountability. PURPOSE To prevent unauthorized modification or disclosure of data or programs APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES: DME, DDiE, PME, PDiE COMMENTS Retrofit; The most numerous incidents of misuse identified are in the data-handling areas outside the computer system. Each organization has to develop specific control points that are meaningful with the context of its environment. NAME: I/O Data Storage CATEGORY: Operations 3 (Data Processing) Data Handling 3 (Operations Division) DESCRIPTION: Procedures and facilities to provide lockable storage for sensitive data, programs, and reports. This safeguard is not directed at government, classified material. PURPOSE To prevent unauthorized modification, destruction, or disclosure of data or programs. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES DME, DDeE, DDiE, PME, PDeE PDiE , COMMENTS Retrofit; In a large number of cases, had safes or other lockable storage been used, not only would much of the data disclosure problem been solved, but also much of the data and program destruction problem would have been reduced. -B41-:: :: :: . NAME: Tape/Disk Movement Control CATEGORY: Operations 4 (Data Processing) DESCRIPTION: Procedures and software to ensure control of movement of removable media through the operations area. This includes a capability for traceability and accountability. This safeguard includes requirement for external labels on all media. PURPOSE To prevent unauthorized disclosure of data or programs APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES DDiE PDiE , COMMENTS Retrofit NAME: External Sensitive Area Access Control CATEGORY: Operations 5 (Data Processing) Data Handling 5 (Operations Division) DESCRIPTION: Procedures and facilities to deny or control unauthorized personnel access to sensitive user work areas. The intent of this safeguard is to ensure that a minimum number of people have access to user work areas where they might be able to change records that are in a format they under- stand. PURPOSE To prevent unauthorized modification, destruction, or disclosure of data or programs. • APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES DME DDeE DDiE PME PDeE PDiE , , , , , COMMENTS Retrofit -BA2-:::: :: . NAME: Sensitive Operator Input Control CATEGORY: Operations 6 (Data Processing) DESCRI^ION: Procedures and software to restrict and control sensitive inputs and adjustments that can be made at the operator console without special authoriza- tion. The intent of this safeguard is to ensure that systems are designed or modified so as to minimize operator involvement. PURPOSE To prevent modification and disclosure of data or programs APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES DMI, DDil, PMI, PDil COMMENTS Retrofit NAME: File Backup Standard CATEGORY: Operations 7 (Data Processing) DESCRIPTION: Procedures and software to ensure backup of critical files. This safeguard includes the requirement of a backup schedule for all files and programs to prompt operations personnel when back- ups are required. It also includes provision for proper user notification and supervision. PURPOSE To prevent denial of system service. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES SSD COMMENTS Retrofit -B43-:: :: : . NAME: Card Password Protection CATEGORY: Operations 8 (Data Processing) DESCRIPTION: Procedures to ensure protection of pass 'ord information in punched cards, e.g., in JCL decks. For example, the safeguard might call for- users to place their own card decks in the card reader PURPOSE To prevent unauthorized modification, destruction, or disclosure of intellectual property or denial or theft of service or process. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES: DMI DDel DDil PMI PDel PDil SST, SSD , , , , , , COMMENTS Retrofit NAME: Sensitive Forms Control CATEGORY: Operations 9 (Data Processing) DESCRIPTION: Procedures to ensure that sensitive forms, such as checks and certificates are properly controlled and secured. For example: Each set of serially- numbered forms should be maintained in such a manner that an audit can account for all forms used and remaining in storage. PURPOSE To prevent theft of forms. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES CEStST COMMENTS Retrofit -B44-: :: : NAME: Expiration Date Control CATEGORY: Operations 10 (Data Processing) DESCRIPTION: Procedures and software to ensure that expiration date mechanisms are used properly on all files in which such mechanisms are applicable. The intent of the safeguard is to ensure that expiration dates are maintained and changed only by authorized persons. PURPOSE To prevent data and program modification and denial of system service. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES: DMI PMT SSD , , COMMENTS Retrofit NAME: Console Configuration Control CATEGORY: Operations 11 (Data Processing) DESCRIPTION: Software and hardware to effect hardwiring of the addresses of privileged terminals, such as the system operator console. The intent of this safeguard is to ensure that the addresses of privileged terminals are not program-changeable. PURPOSE To prevent unauthorized modification, destruction, or disclosure of intellectual property or denial or theft of service or process. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES DMI, DDel, DDil, PMI PDel PDil SST, SSD , , , COMMENTS Retrofit: : : NAME: Configuration Control CATEGORY: Operations 12 (Data Processing) DESCRIPTION: Procedures to prevent compromise of any files in the event of a system reconfiguration due to mal- functioning equipment or scheduled maintenance. The intent of the safeguard is to ensure that all system configurations, including emergency con- figurations, do not allow data or program compromise. PURPOSE To prevent unauthorized modification or disclosure of data or programs. APPLICABLE VULNERABILITY CATEGORIES DMI, DDil, PMI, PDil COMMENTS Retrofit -B46-VULNERABILITY CATEGORY ABBREVIATIONS CE&SDe; Unauthorized Destruction of Computer Equipment or Supplies CE&SM: Unauthorized Modification of Computer Equipment or Supplies CE&ST: Theft of Computer Equipment or Supplies DDeE: Unauthorized Destruction of Data External to the Computer System DDel: Unauthorized Destruction of Data Internal to the Computer System DDiE: Unauthorized Disclosure of Data Stored External to the Computer System DDil: Unauthorized Disclosure of Data Stored Internal to the Computer System DME: Unauthorized Modification of Data External to the Computer System DMI: Unauthorized Modification of Data Internal to the Computer System PDeE: Unauthorized Destruction of Programs External to the Computer System PDel: Unauthorized Destruction of Programs Internal to the Computer System PDiE: Unauthorized Disclosure of Programs Stored External to the Computer System PDil: Unauthorized Disclosure of Programs Stored Internal to the Computer System PME: Unauthorized Modification of Programs External to the Computer System PMI: Unauthorized Modification of Programs Internal to the Computer System SSD: Denial of Computer System Services SST: Unauthorized Use of Computer System Services -B47-NBS-114A (REV. 7-73) BIU B.S L. ID OE GP RT A. PO HF ICCO DM AM T. A 1. PUBLICATION OR REPORT NO. 2. G No ov .'t Acces.sion 3. Kc<.iplcnt's AccesMnn No. SHEET NBS SP 500-25 4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE 5. Publication Date An Analysis of Computer Security Safeguards for Detecting January 1978 and Preventing Intentional Computer Misuse 6. Per/orming Organization Code AUTHOR{S) Brian Ruder and J.D. Madden 7. Editor(s) Robert P. Blanc 8. Performing Organ. Report No. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME AND ADDRESS 10. Project/Task/Work Unit No. Stanford Research Institute Menlo Park, California 942025 11. Contract/Grant No. 12. Sponsoring Organization Name and Complete Address (Street, City, State, ZIP) 13. Type of Report & Period Covered National Bureau of Standards Department of Commerce Final Washington, D,C. 20234 14. Sponsoring Agency Code SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 15. Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 77-25368 16. ABSTRACT (A 200-word or less factual summary ofmost significant information. Ifdocument includes a significant bibliography or literature survey, mention it here.) Stanford Research Institute (SRI) has an extensive file of actual computer misuse cases. The National Bureau of Standards asked SRI to use these cases as a foundation to develop ranked lists of computer safeguards that would have prevented or detected the recorded intentional misuses. This report provides a working definition of intentional computer misuse, a construction of a vulnerability taxonomy of intentional computer misuse, a list of 88 computer safeguards, and a model for classifying the safeguards. In addition, there are lists ranking prevention and detection safeguards, with an explanation of the method of approach used to arrive at the lists. This report should provide the computer security specialist with sufficient information to start or enhance a computer safeguard program. 17. KEY WORDS (six to twelve entries; alphabetical order; capitalize only the first letter of the first key word unless a proper name; s Ce opa mra pt ued tb ey rsem ci rco il mon es ;) computer fraud; computer mi_suse; computer saf.eguar_ds,. computer security; computer security model; privacy. 18. AVAILABILITY Unlimited 19. (S TE HC IU SR RI ET PY OC RL TA )SS 21. NO. OF PAGES 80 1 ' For Official Distribution. Do Not Release to NTIS UNCLASSIFIED rXl O wr «d <:e hr inF fr >ro om n.Su Dp .. c.of 70D 4o 0c 7, . U S. DS. CaG to .ve Nor .nm cen nt .P ifi Uf :t 5me 0UOf -f Zic be 20. (S TE HC IU SR PI AT GY E)CLASS 22. Price $2.40 1 1 O Spr rd ie nr gfF ir elo dm ,N Va it ri go in na il a T 2e 2c 1h 51nical Informatjon Service (NTIS) UNCLASSIFIED USCOMM-DC 29042-P74 4U. S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE:1977--26l-238/')l6/ X/ y V^S?" T / ... the monthly There's y^^^^^ 1 magazine of the Nation- ^^^^^"/^ anew / of Standards. / Still featured are special ar- ^^^^f^^Y// tides of general interest on l/l current topics such as consum- ^^\^^^>^^y product safety and building look / technology. In addition, new sec- tions are designed to PROVIDE . . . SCIENTISTS with illustrated discussions of recent technical developments and work in progress INFORM INDUSTRIAL . . . MANAGERS of technology transfer activities in Federal and private labs. DESCRIBE TO MAN- . . UFACTURERS advances in the field of voluntary and mandatory standards. The new DIMENSIONS/NBS also carries complete listings of upcoming conferences to be held at NBS and reports on all the latest NBS publications, with information on how to order. Finally, each issue carries a page of News Briefs, aimed at keeping scientist and consum- er alike up to date on major developments at the Nation's physi- cal sciences and measurement laboratory. (pleasedetachhere) SUBSCRIPTION ORDER FORM EntermySubscriptionTo DIMENSIONS/NBSat$12.50.Add$3.15forforeignmailing.Noadditional O Remittance Enclosed postage is required for mailing within the United States or its possessions. Domestic remittances (Make checks payable shouldbemadeeitherbypostal moneyorder,expressmoneyorder,orcheck.Foreignremittances to Superintendent of should be made eitherby international moneyorder, drafton an American bank,orby UNESCO Documents) coupons. n Charge to my Deposit Send Subscription to: Account No. NAME-FIRST, LAST I I I I I I I I I I I I I COMPANY NAMEORADDITIONALADDRESSLINE MAIL ORDER FORM TO: STREETADDRESS SuperintendeTit of Documents II Government Printing Office I I I I I I I I I I I I I I Washington, D.C. 20402 II II I I I I I I I I I I I I PLEASE PRINTMHeat Manipienl Guideliook A ty —pical plant can save about 20 percent of its In addition to case studies, the guidebook contains fuel just by installing waste heat recovery equip- information on: ment. But with so much equipment on the market, how do you decide what's right for you? • sources and uses ofwaste heat • determining waste heat requirements Find the answers to your problems in the Waste • economics ofwaste heat recovery Heat Management Guidebook, a new handbook • commercial options in waste heat recovery from the Commerce Department's National Bureau equipment of Standards and the Federal Energy Administra- • instrumentation • engineering data for waste heat recovery tion. • assistance for designing and installing waste ! heatsystems The Waste Heat Management Guidebook is de- j s mi ag nn ae gd ert ,o h le el ap rnyo hu, owth te oco cs at p- tc uo rn esc ai no dus ree cn yg ci ln eee hr eao tr T Guo io dr ed be or oky ,ou sr ec no dpy $2o .f 75th pe eW ra cs ot pe yHe (ca ht eM ckan oa rg me om ne en yt that is normally lost to the environment during in- order) to Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Gov- dustrial and commercial processes. ernment Printing Office, Washington, D.C. 20402. A discount of 25 percent is given on orders of 100 The heart of the guidebook is 14 case studies of copies or more mailed to one address. companies that have recently installed waste heat recovery systems and profited. One of these appli- The Waste Heat Management Guidebook Is part of cations may be right for you, but even if it doesn't the EPIC industrial energy management program fit exactly, you'll find helpful approaches to solving aimed at helping industry and commerce adjust to many waste heat recovery problems. the increased cost and shortage of energy. I U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE/National Bureau of Standards FEDERAL ENERGY ADMINISTRATION/Energy Conservation and EnvironmentANNOUNCEMENT OF NEW PUBLICATIONS ON COMPUTER SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY Superintendent of Documents, Government Printing Office, Washington, D. C. 20402 Pear Sir: Please add my name to the announcement list ofnew publications to be issued in the series: National Bureau of Standards Special Publication 500-. Name Company Address City State Zip Code (Notification key N-503)NBS TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS PERIODICALS NOTE: At present the principal publication outlet for these J o af nO dtU hR de eN N vA a et lL i oo pn mO a elF ntBuR ir nE eS a tu hE oA o sf eRC S dt iH sa cn— id pT a lrh id ne s esJ re oo p fu or rn tta hsl eN po B hf yS siR r ce e as s le ea a ar r nc c dh h D cda aat nta a Chi (s eJ mPt ih C ce R aD lJ )o Su opr cun iba ell ti yso hf (e Ad CP q Sh uy )as ri atc nea r dl ly ta hn f ed or AmC N eh B re Sm ii cc aba nyl It nhR see tif A te umr tee ern ic o-e f e inn cg li un de eeri pn hg ysis cc si ,enc ce hs emi in stw rh y,ich ent gh ie neeB ru ir nge ,au mai ts heac mt ai tv ie. cs,Th ae ns de P a 2vh 0ay 0is 5li 6ac .bs le( fA rIP o) m. ACS Sub ,sc 1ri 1p 5t 5io Sn is x, teer ne tp hrin St ts ., N.a Wn .d , Ws au sp hp .l ,em De .n Ct .s computer sciences. Papers cover a broad range of subjects, — with major emphasis on measurement methodology, and Building Science Series Disseminates technical information the basic technology underlying standardization. Also in- developed at the Bureau on building materials, components, cluded from time to time are survey articles on topics closely systems, and whole structures. The series presents research related to the Bureau's technical and scientific programs. As results, test methods, and performance criteria related to the a special service to subscribers each issue contains complete structural and environmental functions and the durability citations to all recent NBS publications in NBS and non- and safety charac —teristics of building elements and systems. NBS media. Issued six times a year. Annual subscription: Technical Notes Studies or reports which are complete in domestic $17.00; foreign $21.25. Single copy, $3.00domestic; themselves but restrictive in their treatment of a subject. $3.75 foreign. Analogous to monographs but not so comprehensive in N So ect te i: onTh Ae "J Po hu yr sn ia cl sw aa ns df Co hr em me ir sl ty ryp "ub al nis dhe Sd ectin iot nw Bo s "e Mc ati to hn es -: s Nsc e Bro Svp ee uao nsr dead ref vi ten hhi eit ci l sv ee pof nin o sr ot rr sfie hna iat plme r on e ft po oro ttf hs et roh fe gos w vu o eb r nj ke uc nt p ee na r tr fe oa a. r gem neO cdf it ee san .t maticalSciences." — Voluntary Product Standards Developed under procedures DIMENSIONS/NBS , published by the Department of Commerce in Part 10, This monthly magazine is published to inform scientists, Title 15, of the Code of Federal Regulations. The purpose engineers, businessmen, industry, teachers, students, and of the standards is to establish nationally recognized require- c wio tn hsu pm re ir ms aro yf et mhe phl aa st ies st oa ndv ta hn ece ws orin ks ac tie Nn Bce S.an Td hetec mh an go al zo ig ny e, m wie tn hts a f bao sr ispr fo od ruc ct os, mma on nd ut no dep rr so tv ai nd de ina gll ofco tn hc ee cr hn ae rd acti en rt ie sr te is cts s highlights and reviews such issues as energy research, fire of the products. NBS administers this program as a supple- protection, building technology, metric conversion, pollution ment to the activities of the private sector standardizing abatement, health and safety, and consumer product per- organizations. formance. In addition, it reports the results of Bureau pro- Consumer Information Series— Practical information, based grams in measurement standards and techniques, properties on NBS research and experience, covering areas of interest of matter and materials, engineering standards and services, instrumentation, and automatic data processing. to the consumer. Easily understandable language and illustrations provide useful background knowledge for shop- Annual subscription: Domestic, $12.50; Foreign $15.65. ping in today's technological marketplace. N0NPERI0DICAL6 Order above NBS publications from: Superintendent of — Documents, Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C. Monographs Major contributions to the technical liter- 20402. — ature on various subjects related to the Bureau's scientific Order following NBS publications NBSIR's and FIPS from and technic —al activities. the National Technical Information Services, Springfield, Handbooks Recommended codes of engineering and indus- Va. 22161. trial practice (including safety codes) developed in coopera- Federal Inf—ormation Processing Standards Publications tion with interested industries, professional organizations, (FIPS PUB) Publications in this series collectively consti- and regulatory bodies —. tute the Federal Information Processing Standards Register. Special Publications Include proceedings of conferences Register serves as the official source of information in the sponsored by NBS, NBS annual reports, and other special Federal Government regarding standards issued by NBS publications appropriate to this grouping such as wall charts, pursuant to the Federal Property and Administrative Serv- pocket cards, and bibliographi —es. ices Act of 1949 as amended, Public Law 89-306 (79 Stat. Applied Mathematics Series Mathematical tables, man- 1127), and as implemented by Executive Order 11717 uals, and studies of special interest to physicists, engineers, (38 FR 12315, dated May 11, 1973) and Part 6 of Title 15 chemists, biologists, mathematicians, computerprogrammers, CFR (Code of Federal Regulations). — Na an td ioo nt ah lers Ste an ng da ag re dd Ri en fes rc eie nn ct eifi Dc ata and Set re ic eh sn —ica Pl row vo ir dk e. s quanti- N inB teS rimInt oe rra fg ie nan lcy reR pe orp to srt os n( wN oB rS kIR) perf^A orms epe dcia bl y s Ne Bri Ses fo orf tative data on the physical and chemical properties of outside sponsors (both government and non-government). materials, compiled from the world's literature and critically In general, initial distribution is handled by the sponsor; evaluated. Developed under a world-wide program co- public distribution is by the National Technical Information ordinated by NBS. Program under authority of National Services (Springfield, Va. 22161) in paper copy ormicrofiche Standard Data Act (Public Law 90-396). form. BIBLIOGRAPHIC SUBSCRIPTION SERVICES A The following current-awareness and literature-survey bibli- Superconducting Devices and Materials. literature survey ographies are issued periodically by the Bureau: A issued quarterly. Annual subscription: $30.00. Send subscrip- Cryogenic Data Center Current Awareness Service. litera- ture survey issued biweekly. Annual subscription: Domes- tion orders and remittances for the preceding bibliographic tic, $25.00; Foreign, $30.00. services to National Bureau of Standards, Cryogenic Data Liquified Natural Gas. A literature survey issued quarterly. Annual subscription: $20.00. Center (275.02) Boulder, Colorado 80302.U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE National Bureau of Standards Washington, D.C. 20234 POSTAGE AND FEES PAID OFFICIAL BUSINESS U.S. DEPART CM OE MNT -2O 1F 5COMMERCE PenaltyforPrivateUse,$300 SPECIALFOURTH-CLASSRATE BOOK