NIST Special Publication 500-171 ]!omputer Systems Computer User's Guide >chnology to the Protection of S DEPARTMENTOF DMMERCE Information Resources itional instituteof NISI andardsand !Chnology PUBLICATIONS Cheryl Helsing Marianne Swanson Mary Anne Todd I NATL INST. OF STAND & TECH Rl.C. A111D3 3b4flai - QC 100 .U57 500-171 1989 C.2NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS & TECHNOLOGY — Research Informatic«i Caiter MD Gaithersburg, 20899 rhe National Institute of Standards and Technology" was established by an act of Congresson March 3, 1901. The Institute's overall goal is to strengthen and advance the Nation'sscience and technology and facilitate their effective application for public benefit. To this end, the Institute conducts researchto assure interna- tional competitiveness and leadershipof U.S. industry, science and technology. NIST work involves development and transfer ofmeasurements, standards and relatedscience and technology, insupport ofcontinually improving U.S. productivity, productquality and reliability, innovation and underlying science and engineering. The Institute's technical work is performedby the National Measurement Laboratory, the National Engineering Laboratory, the National Computer Systems Laboratory, and the Institute for MaterialsScienceand Engineering. The National Measurement Laboratory Provides the national system ofphysical and chemical measurement; Basic Standards^ coordinatesthesystem with measurementsystems ofother nations Radiation Research and furnishes essential services leading to accurateand uniform Chemical Physics physical and chemicalmeasurementthroughout the Nation'sscientific Analytical Chemistry community, industry, and commerce;provides advisory and research services to other Government agencies; conducts physical and chemical research;develops, produces, anddistributes Standard Reference Materials;provides calibrationservices; and managesthe National Standard ReferenceData System. The Laboratoryconsists ofthe following centers: The National Engineering Laboratory Providestechnologyandtechnical services to the piiblic and private Computing andApplied sectors to address national needs andto solve nationalproblems; Mathematics conducts research in engineering and appliedscienceinsupportofthese Electronics and Electrical efforts; builds andmaintains competencein the necessary disciplines Engineering^ requiredto carryout this research and technical service;developsengi- Manufacturing Engineering neering dataand measurementcapabilities;provides engineering measure- Building Technology menttraceabilityservices;developstest methodsand proposesengi- Fire Research neering standards and codechanges;developsandproposesnew Chemical Engineering'' engineeringpractices; and developsand improvesmechanismsto transfer results ofits researchto theultimateuser. The Laboratory consists ofthe following centers: The National Computer Systems Laboratory Conductsresearchandprovidesscientific and technicalservices to aid InformationSystems Federal agenciesintheselection, acquisition, application, anduse of Engineering computertechnologyto improveeffectiveness and economyin Govern- Systems and Software mentoperationsin accordancewithPublic Law 89-306 (40 U.S.C.759), Technology relevantExecutive Orders, and otherdirectives; carriesoutthis mission ComputerSecurity by managingthe Federal InformationProcessing Standards Program, Systems and Network developing Federal ADP standards guidelines, and managing Federal Architecture participationin ADP voluntary standardizationactivities; providesscien- Advanced Systems tific and technologicaladvisory services and assistance to Federal agencies;and providesthe technical foundationfor computer-related policiesofthe Federal Government The Laboratory consistsofthe followingdivisions: The Institutefor Materials Science and Engineering Conductsresearch andprovides measurements, data, standards, refer- Ceramics encematerials, quantitative imderstanding and other technical informa- Fracture and Deformation^ tionfundamental to theprocessing,structure, propertiesand perfor- Polymers manceofmaterials;addressesthescientific basisfor new advanced Metallurgy materialstechnologies;plansresearch arouiKi cross-cutting scientific ReactorRadiation themessuchas oondestructiveevaluation and phasediagramdevelop- ment;overseesInstitute-wide technicalprogramsinnuclearreactor radiationresearchand nondestructive evaluation; and broadly dissem- inatesgenerictechnical informationresulting fromits programs. The Institute consists ofthefollowingdivisions; 'HeadquartenandLaboratoriesatGaithersburg,MD,unlessotlierwisenoted;mailingaddress MD Gaitbenburg. 20899. %omedivisionswithinthecenterarelocatedatBoulder,CO80303. 'LocatedatBoulder,CO,withtomeelementsatGaithersburg.MD.NIST Special Publication ;;0()-171 Computer User's Guide to the Protection of Information Resources Cheryl Helslng Deloltte, Haskins & Sells ClCloo Marianne Swanson MaryAnne Todd National Computer Systems Latxjratory National Institute of Standards and Technology Gaithersburg, MD 20899 October 1989 U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE Robert A. Mosbacher, Secretary NATIONAL INSTITUTEOF STANDARDS ANDTECHNOLOGY Raymond G. Kammer, Acting Director NisrReports on Computer Systems Technology The National Institute ofStandards andTechnology (NIST) (formerlythe National Bureau of Standards) has a unique responsibility for computer systems technology within the Federal government. NIST's National Computer Systems Laboratory (NCSL) develops standards and guidelines, provides technical assistance, and conducts research for computers and related telecommunications systems to achieve more effective utilization of Federal information technology resources, NCSL's responsibilities include development of technical, management, physical, and administrative standards and guidelines for the cost-effective security and privacy of sensitive unclassified information processed in Federal computers. NCSL assists agencies in developing securityplans and in improving computer securityawareness train- ing.This Special Publication 500 series reports NCSL researchand guidelinesto Federal agencies aswell as to organizations In industry, government, and academia. Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 89-600764 National Institute of Standards and Technology Special Publication 500-171 Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol. Spec. Publ. 500-171, 16 pages (Oct. 1989) CODEN: NSPUE2 U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE WASHINGTON: 1989 For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC 20402The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) is responsible for developing standards, providing technical assistance, and conducting research for computers and related systems. These activities provide technical support to government and industry in the effective, safe, and economical use of computers. With the passage of the Computer Security Act of 1987 (P.L. 100-235), NIST's activities also include the development of standards and guidelines needed to assure the cost-effective security and privacy of sensitive information in Federal computer systems. This guide isjust one of three brochures designed for a specific audience. The "Executive Guide to the Protection of Information Resources," and the "Managers Guide to the Protection of Information Resources" complete the series. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS & This guide was written by Cheryl Helsing ofDeloitte, Haskins Sells in conjunction with Marianne Swanson and Mary Anne Todd of the National Institute of Standards and Technology.Introduction Today's computer technology, with microcomputers and on-hne ac- cess, has placed the power of the computer where it belongs, in YOUR hands. YOU, the users, develop computer appUcations and perform other data processing functions which previously were only done by the computer operations personnel. These advances have greatly improved our efficiency and effectiveness but, also present a serious challenge in achieving adequate data security. While excellent progress has been made in computer technology, very Uttle has been done to inform users ofthe vulnerability of data and information to such threats as unauthorized modification, dis- closure, and destruction, either deliberate or accidental. This guide will make you aw2ire of some of the undesirable things that can hap- pen to data and will provide some practical solutions for reducing your risks to these threats. WHO IS RESPONSIBLE FOR PROTECTING DATA AND INFOR- MATION? The statement that "security is everyone's responsibility" is absolutely true. Owners, developers, operators and users ofinformation systems each has a personal responsibihty to protect these resources. Func- tional managers have thqresponsibihty to provide appropriate security controls for any information resources entrusted to them. These managers are personally responsible for understanding the sensitivity and criticahty of their data and the extent oflosses that could occur if the resources are not protected. Managers must en- sure that all users of their data and systems are made aware of the practices and procedures used to protect the information resources. When you don't know what your security responsibihties are, ASK YOUR MANAGER OR SUPERVISOR. WHAT IS "SENSITIVE" DATA? All data is sensitive to some degree; exactly how sensitive is unique to each business environment. Within the Federal Government, per- sonal information is sensitive to unauthorized disclosure under the 1Privacy Act of 1974. In some cases, data is far more sensitive to ac- cidental errors or omissions that compromise accuracy, integrity, or availability. For example, in a Management Information System, in- accurate, incomplete, or obsolete information can result in erroneous management decisions which could cause serious damage and re- quire time and money to rectify. Data and information which art criti- cal to an agency's ability to perform its mission are sensitive to non- avadlability. Still other data are sensitive to fraudulent mamipulation for personal gain. Systems that process electronic funds transfers, control inven- tories, issue checks, control accounts receivables and payables, etc., cam be fraudulently exploited resulting in serious losses to an agency. One way to determine the sensitivity of data is to ask the questions "What will it cost if the data is wrong? Manipulated for fraudulent purposes? Not available? Given to the wrong person?" Ifthe damiage is more than you can tolerate, then the data is sensitive and should have adequate security controls to prevent or lessen the potential loss. WHAT RISKS ARE ASSOCIATED WITH THE USE OF COM- PUTERS? Over the past several decades, computers have taken over virtually all of our major record-keeping functions. Recently, personal com- puters have made it cost-effective to automate many office functions. Computerization has many advantages and is here to stay; however, automated systems introduce new risks, and we should take steps to control those risks. We should be concerned with the same risks that existed when manual procedures were used, as well as some new risks created by the unique nature of computers themselves. One risk introduced by computers is the concentration of tremendous amounts ofdata in one location. The greater the concentration, the greater the conse- quences ofloss or damage. Another example is that computer users We access information from remote terminads. must be able to posi- tively identify the user, as well as ensure that the user is only able to access information and functions that have been authorized. Newspaper accounts of computer "hackers," computer virus attacks. 2and other types of intruders underscore the reahty of the threat to government and commercial computer systems. HOW MUCH SECURITY ENOUGH? IS No matter how many controls or safeguards we use, we can never We achieve total security. can, however, decrease the risk in propor- tion to the strength of the protective measures. The degree of protec- tion is based on the value ofthe information; in other words, how serious would be the consequences if a certain type of information were to be wrongfully changed, disclosed, delayed, or destroyed? 3" General Responsibilities All Federal computer system users share certain general respon- sibilities for information resource protection. The following con- siderations should guide your actions. • Treat information as you would any valuable asset. You would not walk away from your desk leaving cash or other vadu- ables unattended. You should tcike the same C2ire to protect informa- tion. Ifyou are not sure of the value or sensitivity ofthe various kinds of information you handle, ask your manager for guideuice. • Use government computer systems only for lawful and authorized purposes. The computer systems you use in your dailywork should be used only for authorized purposes and in a lawful manner. There are computer crime laws that prescribe criminal penalties for those who illegally ac- cess Federal computer systems or data. Additionally, the un- authorized use of Federal computer systems or use of authorized privileges for unauthorized purposes could result in disciplinary ac- tion. • Observe policies and procedures established by agency management. Specific requirements for the protection of information have been es- tablished by your agency. These requirements maybe found in pohcy manuals, rules, or procedures. Ask your manager ifyou are unsure about your own responsibihties for protection ofinformation. Recognize that you are accountable for your ac- • on computer systems. tivities After you receive authorization to use any Federal computer system, you become personally responsible and accountable for your activity on the system. Accordingly, your use should be restricted to those functions needed to carry outjob responsibilities. 5• Report unusual occurrences to your manager. Many losses would be avoided if computer users would report any circumstances that seem unusual or irregul2ir. Warning signals could include such things as unexplainable system activity that you did not perform, data that appears to be of questionable accuracy, and imex- pected or incorrect processing results. Ifyou should notice anything of a questionable nature, bring it to your manager's attention. 6Security and Control Guidelines Some common-sense protective measures can reduce the risk of loss, damage, or disclosure of information. Following are the most impor- t£mt areas of information systems controls that assure that the system is properly used, resistant to disruptions, cmd rehable. • Make certain no one can impersonate you. If a password is used to verify your identity, this is the key to system security. Do not disclose your password to anyone, or allow anyone to observe your password as you enter it during the sign-on process. Ifyou choose your own password, avoid selecting a password with any personal associations, or one that is very simple or short. The aim is to select a password that would be difficult to guess or derive. "IREDDOG" would be a better password than "DUKE." Ifyour system allows you to change your own password, do so regularly. Find out what your agency requires, and change passwords at least that frequently. Periodic password changes keep undetected intruders from continuously using the password of a legitimate user. After you are logged on, the computer will attribute all activity to your user id. Therefore, never leave your terminal without logging off — even for a few minutes. Always log off or otherwise inactivate your my terminal so no one could perform activity under your user id when you are away from the area. • Safeguard sensitive information from disclosure to otfiers. People often forget to lock up sensitive reports and computer media containing sensitive data when they leave their work areas. Informa- tion carelessly left on top of desks and in unlocked storage can be casually observed, or deliberately stolen. Every employee who works with sensitive information should have lockable space available for storage when information is not in use. Ifyou aren't sure what infor- 7mation should be locked up or what locked storage is available, ask your manager. While working, be aware of the visibility of data on your personal computer or terminal display screen. You may need to reposition equipment or furniture to eliminate over-the-shoulder viewing. Be especially careful near windows and in public areas. Label all sensi- tive diskettes and other computer media to alert other employees of the need to be especially careful. When no longer needed, sensitive information should be deleted or discarded in such a way that un- authorized individuals cannot recover the data. Printed reports should be finely shredded, while data on magnetic media should be overwritten. Files that are merely deleted are not really erased and Ccui still be recovered. • Install physical security devices or software on per- sonal computers. The value and populau^ity ofperson2il computers make theft a big problem, especially in low-security office areas. Relatively inexpen- sive hardware devices greatly reduce the risk of equipment loss. Such devices involve lock-down cables or enclosures that attach equip- ment to furniture. Another approach is to place equipment in lock- able cabinets. When data is stored on a hard disk, take some steps to keep un- A authorized individuals from accessing that data. power lock device only allows key-holders to turn on power to the personal computer. Where there is a need to segregate information between multiple authorized users of a personad computer, additional security in the form of software is probably needed. Specific files could be encrypted to make them unintelligible to unauthorized staff, or ac- cess control software can divide storage space among authorized users, restricting each user to their own files. • Avoid costly disruptions caused by data or hardware loss. Disruptions and delays are expensive. No one enjoys working franti- cally to re-enter work, do the samejob twice, or fix problems while new work piles up. Most disruptions can be prevented, and the im- pact of disruptions can be minimized by advance planning. Proper en- vironmental conditions and power suppUes minimize equipment out- 8ages and information loss. Many electrical circuits in office 2ireas do not constitute an adequate power source, so dedicated circuits for computer systems should be considered. Make certEiin that your sur- roundings meet the essential requirements for correct equipment operation. Cover equipment when not in use to protect it from dust, water leaks, and other hazards. For protection from accidental or deliberate destruction of data, regular data backups are essential. Complete system backups should be taken at intervals determined by how quickly information changes or by the volume of transactions. Backups should be stored in 2Uiother location, to guard against the possibihty of original and back- up copies being destroyed by the same fire or other disaster. • Maintain tiie auttiohzed liardware Isoftware con- figuration. Some organizations have been affected by computer "viruses" ac- quired through seemingly useful or innocent software obtained from pubUc access bulletin boards or other sources; others have been U- able for software illegally copied by employees. The instcillation of un- authorized hardw2ire can cause damage, inv2didate wairranties, or have other negative consequences. Install only hardware or software that has been acquired through normal acquisition procedures and comply with all software Ucensing agreement requirements. 9SUMMARY Ultimately, computer security is the user's responsibility. You, the user, must be alert to possible breaches in security and adhere to the security regulations that have been estabUshed within your agency. The security practices listed are not inclusive, but rather designed to remind you and raise your awareness towards securing your informa- tion resources: PROTECT YOUR EQUIPMENT • Keep it in a secure environment AWAY • Keepfood, drink, and cigarettes from it • Know where the fire suppression equipment is lo- cated and know now to use it PROTECT YOUR AREA AWAY • Keep unauthorizedpeople from your equip- ment and data • Challenge strangers in your area PROTECT YOUR PASSWORD • Never write it down orgive it to anyone • Don use names, numbers or dates which areper- 't sonally identified with you • Change it often, but change it immediately ifyou think has been compromised It PROTECT YOUR FILES • Don Y allow unauthorized access to your files and data NEVER • leave your equipment unattended with yourpassword activated- SIGN OFF! PROTECT AGAINST VIRUSES • Don Y use unauthorized software ANY • Back up your files before implementing new software 11LOCK UP STORAGE MEDIA CONTAINING SENSITIVE DATA • Ifthe data or information is sensitive or critical to your operation, lock up! it BACK UP YOUR DATA • Keep duplicates ofyoursensitive data in a safe place, out ofyour immediate area • Back it up as often as necessary REPORT SECURITY VIOLATIONS • Tellyour manager ifyou see any unauthorized changes to your data • Immediately report any loss ofdata orprograms, whether automated or hard copy 12For Additional Information National Institute of Standards and Technology Computer Security Program Office A-216 Technology MD Gaithersburg, 20899 (301) 975-5200 For further information on the management of information resour- ces, NIST publishes Federal Information Processing Standards Pubhcations (FIBS PUBS). These pubhcations deal with many aspects of computer security, including password usage, data encryp- ADP tion, risk management and contingency planning, and computer A system security certification and accreditation. hst of current pub- hcations is available from: Standards Processing Coordinator (ADP) National Computer Systems Laboratory National Institute of Standards and Technology Technology Building, B-64 MD Gaithersburg, 20899 Phone: (301) 975-2817 13NbS-lUA i><LV. 2-Bi:i U.S. DKPT. OF COMM. 1. PUBLICATION OR 2. Performing Organ. Report No. 3. Publication Date REPORT NO. BIBLIOGRAPHIC DATA SHEET(See insiructions) NIST/SP-500/171 October 1989 4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE jiupuLer User's Guide To Tlie ProLecLion Of inl urination Resources 5. AUTHOR(S) Cheryl Helsinq, Marianne Swanson, and Mary Anne Todd 6. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION (Ifjoint or other than NBS. see insiructions) 7. Contract/Grant No. NATIONALINSrmJTEOFSTANDARDSANDTECHNOLOGY ( Ul .o Sf .tn Do Ert Py AN RA TT MI EO NN TAL OFBU CR OE MA MU EROF CESTANDARDS) 8. Type of Report & Period Covered GAITHERSBURG.MO20699 Final 9. SPONSORING ORGANIZATION NAME AND COMPLETE ADDRESS (Street. City. State, ZIP) Same as item #6 10. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 89-600764 Document describes a computer program; SF-I8S, FlPS Software Summary, is attached. I I 11. ABSTRACT (A 200-word or less {actual summary ofmost significant information. If document includes a significant bibliography or literature survey, mention it here) Computers have changed the way we handle our information resources. Large amounts of information are stored in one central place with the ability to be accessed from remote locations. Users have a personal responsibility for the security of the system and the data stored in it. This document outlines the user's responsibilities and provides security and control guidelines to be implemented. 12. KEY WORDS (Six to twelve entries; alphabetical order; capitalize only proper names; and separate key words by semicolons) controls; information resources; protective measures; risks; sensitive data; vulnerabilities 13. AVAILABILITY 14. NO. OF PRINTED PAGES [)(~| Unlimited 16 For Official Distribution. Do Not Release to NTIS I I PnOrder From Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office,Washington, D.C. 20-W2. 15. Price Order From National Technical Information Service (NTIS), Springfield, VA. 22161 uscomm-oc e049-paoANNOUNCEMENT OF NEW PUBLICATIONS ON COMPUTER SYSTEMS TECHNOLOGY Superintendent of Documents Government Printing Office Washington. DC 20402 Dear Sir: Please add my name to the announcement list of new publications to be issued in the series: Natiorial Institute of Standards and Technology Special Publication 500-. Name Company Address City State Zip Code (Notificationkey H-503) iz U. S. Government Printing Office: 1989 - 251-395 (00899)NIST Technical Publications Periodical — Journal of Research of the National Institute of Standards and Technology Reports NIST research and development in those disciplines of the physical and engineering sciences in which the Institute is active. These include physics, chemistry, engineering, mathematics, and computer sciences. Papers cover a broad range of subjects, with major emphasis oji measurement methodology and the basic technology underlying standardization. Also included from time to time are survey articles on topics closely related to the Institute's technical and scientific programs. Issued six times a year. NonperiodicaIs — Monographs Major contributions to the technical literature on various subjects related to the Institute's scientific and technical activities. — Handbooks Recommended codes ofengineering and industrial practice (including safety codes) de- veloped in cooperation with interested industries, professional organizations, and regulatory bodies. — Special Publications Include proceedings of conferences sponsored by NIST, NIST annual reports, and other special publications appropriate to this grouping such as wall charts, pocket cards, and bibliographies. — Applied Mathematics Series Mathematical tables, manuals, and studies ofspecial interest to physi- cists, engineers, chemists, biologists, mathematicians, computer programmers, and others engaged in scientific and technical work. — National Standard Reference Data Series Provides quantitative data on the physical and chemical properties of materials, compiled from the world's literature and critically evaluated. Developed un- der a worldwide program coordinated by NIST under the authority of the National Standard Data Act (Public Law 90-396). NOTE: The Journal of Physical and Chemical Reference Data (JPCRD) is pubhshed quarterly for NIST by the American Chemical Society (ACS) and the American Insti- tute of Physics (AIP). Subscriptions, reprints, and supplements are available from ACS, 1155 Six- teenth St., NW., Washington, DC 20056. — Building Science Series Disseminates technical information developed at the Institute on building materials, components, systems, and whole structures. The series presents research results, test methods, and performance criteria related to the structural and environmental functions and the durability and safety characteristics ofbuilding elements and systems. — Technical Notes Studies or reports which are complete in themselves but restrictive in their treat- ment ofa subject. Analogous to monographs but not so comprehensive in scope or definitive in treatment ofthe subject area. Often serve as a vehicle for final reports ofwork performed at NIST under the sponsorship ofother government agencies. — Voluntary Product Standards Developed under procedures published by the Department ofCom- merce in Part 10, Title 15, of the Code of Federal Regulations. The standards establish nationally recognized requirements for products, and provide all concerned interests with a basis for common understanding of the characteristics of the products. NIST administers this program as a supplement to the activities ofthe private sector standardizing organizations. — Consumer Information Series Practical information, based on NIST research and experience, cov- ering areas of interest to the consumer. Easily understandable language and illustrations provide use- ful background knowledge for shopping in today's technological marketplace. Order the above NISTpublicationsfrom: Superintendent ofDocuments, Government Printing Office, DC Washington, 20402. — Order the following NISTpublications FIPS and NISTIRs—from the National TechnicalInformation Service, Springfield, VA 22161. — Federal Information Processing Standards Publications (FIPS PUB) Publications in this series col- lectively constitute the Federal Information Processing Standards Register. The Register serves as the official source of information in the Federal Government regarding standards issued by NIST pursuant to the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949 as amended, Public Law 89-306 (79 Stat. 1127), and as implemented by Executive Order 11717 (38 FR 12315, dated May 11, 1973) and Part 6 ofTitle 15 CFR (Code of Federal Regulations). NIST Interagency Reports CNISTIR)—A special series ofinterim or final reports on work performed by NIST for outside sponsors (both government and non-government). In general, initial distribu- tion is handle Vd Aby the sponsor; public distribution is by the National Technical Information Service, Springfield, 22161, in paper copy or microfiche form.U.S. Department of Commerce National Instttirte of Standards andTechnology (tormerly National Bureau of Standards) Galtherstxirg. MD 20899 Official Business PenaltyforPrivate Use $300