CofTiputer Science comTercT"' Va^'r^ and Technology NBS Special Publication 500-85 Executive Guide ADP Contingency to Planning MATL INST OF STAND & TECHComputer Science and Technology NBS Special Publication 500-85 •ATIONAL BU«BAC or nAiTDAXui _ ^ uauAttr Executive Gui.d,e HB I 0 t98| to ADP Contingency Planning James K Shaw Sluart W. Kalzke InstituteforComputer Sciencesand Technology National Bureau of Standards Washington. DC 20234 ^1^ U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE Malcolm Baldrlge. Secretary National Bureau of Standards ErnestAmbler, Director Issued January 1982Reports on Computer Science and Technology TheNationalBureauolStandardshasaspecialresponsibilitywithin the Federal Government for computer science and technology I activities. The programs ofthe NBS Institute for Computer Sciences ' and Technology are designed to provide ADP standards, guidelines, and technical advisory services to improve the effectiveness of computer utilization inthe Federal sector, and to perform appropriate | I' researchanddevelopmenteffortsasfoundationforsuchactivitiesand | programs. This publication series will report these NSS efforts tothe ( Federalcomputercommunityaswellastointerestedspecialistsinthe academic and private sectors. Those wishing to receive notices ol publications in this series should completeand return the form atthe j end of this publication i| National Bureau of Standards Special Publication 500-85 I Nat Bur Stand. (US), Spec Publ. 500-85, 16 pages(Jan 1982) CODEN; XNBSAV Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 81-600182 U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE WASHINGTON: 1982FOREWORD This publication has been prepared for executives and managers who depend on ADP resources and services to accomplish the organizational objectives for which they are responsible. The goal is to help in understanding the need for Automatic Data Processing (ADP) contingency planning, to specify management's scope of involvement, to indicate in summary form the contents of ADP contingency plans and how one proceeds in developing such plans. There are, indeed, many existing methods and procedures concerning contingency planning, each of which may be adequate when used for the specific purposes intended by the authors. The process shown in this document is based on the method described in Federal Information Processing Standards Publication (FIPS PUB) 87, Guidelines for ADP Contingency Planning . The primary intended audience ofFIPS PL'B 87 comprises line managers and others within the Federal data processing community who are specifically responsible for .\DP resources. The material herein has been made sufficiently general in nature so as to be useful to all managers throughout the organizational structure engaged in any activity which receives .^DP support. This document is part ofa continuing series of publications on the subject of computer security prepared by the Institute for Gjmputer Sciences and Technology. iiiABSTRACT This document provides, in the form of questions and answers, the background and basic essential information required to understand the developmental process for Auto- matic Data Processing (ADP) contingency plans. The primary intended audience consists of executives and managers who depend on ADP resources and services, yet may not be directly responsible for the daily management or supervision ofdata processing activities or facilities. The publication should also be especially beneficial to individu- als responsible for ensuring compliance with Office ofMan- agement and Budget Circular A-71, Transmittal Memoran- dum Number 1, July 27, 1978. Key words: ADP security; backup operations; computer security; contingency planning; emergency response; Federal Information Processing Standards Publication; recovery actions. ivCONTENTS Page FOREWORD iii ABSTRACT iv BASIC TERMS 1 WHY ADP CONTINGENCY PLANNING 2 1. What is contingency planning? 2 2. Whv should I be concerned about contingencv planning? 2 3. What role should management have in the ADP contingency plan development process? 3 4. Who prepares the ADP contingency plan? 3 5. What types ofevents can disrupt the ADP services on which I depend? 3 5. Are there specific government directives which require contingency plans for ADP activities? I- 7. What guidance is available on developing a contingency Plan? I 8. How does contingency planning fit into the overall ADP security program? 4 DEVELOPING THE PLAN 5 9. Since contingency plans should be developed by all Federal ADP facilities, can't I use those developed by other agencies and avoid duplication? 5 10. How should one begin developinga contingency plan? 5 11. Who performs a risk analysis? 6 12. What strategies should be considered in .ADP contingency planning? fa 1.3. What are the critical elements ofa contingency plan? fa 14. How large and how detailed should the typical ADP contingency plan be? 7 OTHER CONSIDERATIONS H 15. What effect will the ADP contingency plan have on the normal day-to-day operation?.... 8 16. My ADP support is furnished by a service agency (or through interagency agreement). How does contingency planning affect me?... 8 17. My ADP equipment is part ofa distributed data processing (DDP) network. How does contingency planning affect me? 9 18. How is contingency planning related to the normal ADP application systems design process? U BIBLIOGRAPHY 10 VBASIC TERMS Backup operation is a method for accomplishing essential tasks subsequent to disruption of the ADP facility and for continuing operations until the facility is sufficient- ly restored. Computer security refers to the technological safeguards and managerial procedures which can be applied to computer hardware, programs, data and facilities to assure the availability, integrity' and confidentiality of computer based resources and to assure that intended functions are performed without harmful side effects. Critical functions, systems, and resources are those without which the organization cannot continue to operate, or even survive. Emergency response is the immediate action taken upon occurrence ofevents such as natural disasters, fire, civil dis- ruption, and bomb threats in order to protect lives, limit the damage to property, and minimize the impact on ADP operations. Recovery consists ofthe restoration ofthe ADP facility or other related assets following physical destruction or major damage. Risk analysis is an evaluation of the threats to and the loss potential of an ADP facility leading to an estimate of annual loss. Risk analysis results are used in the selection ofcost effective remedial measures. 1WHY ADP CONTINGENCY PLANNING 1. What ie contingency planning? Contingency planning is an accepted and recommended management practice which provides for well thought out responses either to preclude or, at least, to mitigate the harmful effects of potential disruptive events. Prior to preparing contingency plans for data processing activities, it is necessary to perform a risk analysis to determine the critical ADP systems and to weigh the threats and vulnera- bilities as they relate tothe organization. Potential emergen-, cy situations can then be anticipated, strategies for coping with them can be developed, and finally, a predetermina- tion of expected responses to each type of emergency can be made. Contingency planning should, of course, include the actions which must be taken in response to major disasters such as floods and hurricanes. However, it is essential to remember that due to their greater frequency of occurrence, minor, more mundane events such as hardware and software failures, and operator errors, cause far greater disruption ofservice. Contingency planning, ifit is to be ef- fective, should include the means to prevent, or to recover from, minor disruptions as well as catastrophic situations. 2. Why should I be concerned about contingency planning? The growing dependence during the past two decades ofvir- tually all Federal agencies on ADP resources continues today at an unprecedented rate. This expanding dependence increases the importance of plans to prevent loss of ADP service to vital agency functions and activities. Until very recently computers were widely regarded as simply a faster and more cost effective means ofperforming already established manual procedures. Also, when a computer failure occurred, it was possible to revert to the old manual processes with little more effect on the organiza- tion than inconvenience. Today, however, the computer must be considered a means ofdoing what cannot otherwise be done without it. Further, reverting to manual processes upon loss of the ADP resources, for whatever reason, is usually not practical and often quite impossible. It is critical that management recognize this dependence on the ADP resources in order to fully appreciate its own role in contingency planning. The plans should offer adequate as- surance that any reasonably anticipatable interruption of an ADP facility's services will not preclude the continued execution ofthe agency's mission. 23. What role should management have in the ADP contingency plan development process? The key ingredient ofa successful ADP contingency plan is support ofthe plan by both ADP management and senior or- ganizational management. The fact that support by ADP management is necessary is apparent; the requirement for organizational management support, though perhaps not im- mediately obvious, is also absolutely essential. The primary reason is that .^DP services are essential to virtually all echelons of the organization. Without ADP support, many ofthe organizational functions cannot be performed. Conse- quently, management must determine the critical functions of the organization and the interaction and relationships that the ADP activity has with each of these. ADP manage- ment must not be placed in the position of having to determine unilaterallv which functions throughout the orga- nization are critical and which should be given first priority in an emergency. This is a responsibility of senior manage- ment. In summary, management should: • Prior to the preparation ofan .\DP contingency plan, direct that a comprehensive risk analysis be accomplish- ed (See 11). • Direct that all affected elements of the organization participate in the planning process. • Direct the periodic comprehensive testing ofthe plan and revision as necessary. 4. Who prepares the ADP contingency plan? Responsibility for plan preparation should be in the data processing activity. Some input and assistance from other activities will be necessary, but the overall responsibility for preparing, maintaining and testing the plan should be assigned to the data processing activity. 5. What types ofevents can disrupt the ADP services on which I depend? Data processing services are susceptible to a diverse variety of actions which, if not anticipated, create unwelcome dis- ruptions and unnecessary expense in recovery. A brief, non- exhaustive list includes air conditioning failure, power failure, natural disasters, accidents such as sprinkler activa- tion and Halon discharge, lost or destroyed data, forms or other supplies unavailable, strikes, personnel unavailable due to weather, and malicious attacks by terrorists or dis- gruntled employees. 36. Are there specific government directives which require contingency plans for ADP activities? Several requirements impact contingency planning, both indirectly and specifically. These are: • Public Law 93-579 (Privacy Act of 1974), Subsection 3(e)(5) requires that agencies maintaining systems of records subject to the Privacy Act shall: "maintain ail records . . . with such accuracy, relevance, timeliness and completeness as is reasonably necessary . . ." Further, subsection (3)(e)(10) stipulates that agencies shall: "establish appropriate administrative, technical, and physical safeguards to insure the security and confi- dentiality of records and to protect against any antici- pated threats or hazards to their security or integrity . . ." • Federal Property Management Regulations (FPMR). The General Services Administration (GSA) has published comprehensive requirements for ADP contingency planning in 41 CFR, Chapter 101, subparts 101-35 and 101-36, FPMR. • Office of Management and Budget(0MB) Circular A-71, Transmittal Memorandum Number 1, July 27, 1978 contains a wide range ofrequirements on computer security, including contingency planning. In particular, it requires that each agency must include in its security program policies and responsibilities forassuring that ap- propriate contingency plans are developed, tested and maintained. 7. What guidance is available on developing a contingency plan? Two guidelines published by the National Bureau of Standards are particularly relevant to contingency planning: FIPS PUB 31, Guidelines for Automatic Data Processing Physical Security and Risk Management [7j, and FIPS PUB 87. Guidelines for ADP Contingency Planning . Other sources are found in theBibliography. 8. How does contingency planning fit into the overall ADPsecurity program? A successful ADP security program consists ofa number of elements. The sum total ofall elements provides a synergis- tic effect on the overall security program. Contingency planning is but one ofthese elements; others are: • Statement ofsecurity policy objectives • Assignment ofsecurity responsibilities 4• Definition ofsecurity requirements • Performance ofrisk analyses • Selection and implementation ofsafeguards (adminis- trative, physical, and technical) • Performance ofperiodic audits and evaluations • Security considerations during ADP system develop- ment or procurement, to include quality assurance, con- figuration management and documentation practices • Personnel hiring/termination practices and training Many functions now thought of as belonging to ADP security have traditionally been categorized as a part of good management. Contingency planning is certainly one of these, as prudent managers have always planned for the actions to be taken should unexpected events occur. Unfor- tunately, however, the ever increasing growth in dependen- ce on the ADP resources has not been matched by a corre- sponding growth in awareness ofthe need to preserve those vital resources. Actions and events occurring now, however, make it increasingly important to recognize ADP resources for what they are, i.e., a vital element of the organizations which they support and, to a growing extent, one without which such organizations may not survive. DEVELOPING THE PLAN 9. Since contingency plansshould be developed by all Federal .\DP facilities, can't I use those developed by other agencies and avoid duplication? Although many similarities exist among ADP facilities, the disparities in equipment, relative criticality of functions, types ofcustomers, geographical locations and other factors tend to make each facility unique. This uniqueness precludes the use ofa single contingency plan by more than one activity. 10. How should one begin developing a contingency plan? Two things are essential to the development of adequate, cost-effective, and workable contingency plans. First, the functions supported by .ADP which are critical to the 5mission of the parent organization must be identified. These usually represent a relatively small percentage ofthe total ADP workload. Second, the resources essential to the accomplishment of these specific functions must also be identified. A formal risk analysis, as described in FIPS PUB 65, Guideline for ADP Risk Analysis , or other similar methodologies, will provide the data from which identification of both critical functions and critical resources can be derived. Once this is done, preparation of the plan may be begun in a logical, systematic manner. Generally, the plan isdeveloped in three parts-Preliminary Planning, Preparatory Actions, and the Action Plan. Each part is described below (See 13). 11. Who performs a risk analysis? A risk analysis for the ADP operation should generally be accomplished under the aegis of personnel within the ADP activity, quite appropriately with the advice and consent of the individual assigned the responsibility for the security of the installation under the provisions of0MB Circular A-71, TM No. 1. Additionally, it is essential that management direct participation by other organizational activities as required to support the process. 12. What strategies should be considered in ADP contingency planning? In order to develop an effective plan, those charged with doing so must have a clear understanding ofwhat the goals are before commencing preparation of the plan. To accomplish this, management must approve ofa number of strategies to cover a variety of unexpected and unusual situations which might occur (Strategy selection is included in Preliminary Planning (See 13)). For example, for backup operations the approved strategies might be mutual aid agreements, no backup hardware, use ofcommercial contin- gency centers, having more than one ADP site, etc. 13. What are the critical elements of a contingency plan? It is difficult to categorize any one element or part ofa con- tingency plan as being more important than another. Essentially, each part ofthe plan is critical and must be ac- complished with equal diligence for the plan to be success- ful. The three major parts of the contingency plan, as specified in FIPS PUB 87, are: • Preliminary Planning (Part One). This part establishes the ground rules for the remainder of the plan, i.e., it describes the purpose, scope and assump- tions relevant to the plan. It also assigns responsibilities. 6and describes the organizational strategry- for coping with emergencies. The strategies selected will, to a large extent, directly influence the development and amount of detail in the following two parts ofthe plan. • Preparatory .Actions (Part Two). This part contains sections which describe how the organization is to respond to an emergency. For example, instructions should be developed which specify how to maintain the contents of off-site storage, how to form backup teams, how to determine applications and system software re- quirements needed for different situations, and how to establish communications requirements. This part of the plan is prepared in as much detail as possible since it should be read and studied beforehand by those who ultimately must respond to an emergency. • Action Plan (Part Three). This part consists of three sections which document what to do when an emergency happens. It is not intended to be a tutorial, but should state concisely the actions necessar)' to effect the organi- zational strategies which were selected earlier and docu- mented in part one ofthe plan. The three sections ofthis part are: Emergency Response Actions. This category includes those actions which employees must take im- mediately upon the occurrence of an emergency to protect lives and other resources. These actions are typically necessary upon the occurrence of major events such as tornadoes, floods, fire and earthquakes, as well as in instances of more common happenings such as power outages, bursting water pipes, etc. Backup Operations .Actions. This categor\- includes those actions necessary to effect temporary operations at an alternate location when operations at the home facility are no longer possible for whatever reason. These may entail transportation of files, office supplies, equipment, a variety of other materials, and the employees to the alternate site, and the initiation of ADP operations for an indeterminate period of time. - Recovery Actions. This section should describe what must be done to restore permanent operations at the home facility following a disaster or major disrup- tion of service. Included may be plans to rebuild the facility, lease alternate facilities and equipment, etc. 14. How large and how detailed should the typical ADP contingency plan be? The value of a plan is not necessarily proportional to its size. The indiscriminate inclusion of material of doubtful 7value in the plan will seriously downgrade its usefulness to the organization. While no recommendation is made concerning the length ofa contingency plan, most organiza- tions should find that the plan will fit comfortably in a regular loose-leaf notebook. Continuous effort will be required to keep the plan trim and concise, yet sufficiently detailed to communicate the relevant information. OTHER CONSIDERATIONS 15. What effect will the ADP contingency plan have on the normal day-to-day operation? Generally, little effect will be noticed. During development and documentation ofthe plan, some personnel will have to be diverted from their routine tasks to participate. Careful testing of the plan should cause minimal disruption. For example, to test the backup operations actions, the needed backup files and materials would be taken to the alternate site for processing while regular operations continue at the home site. Also, to test emergency response actions for fires, bursting pipes, etc., it is not necessary to cease opera- tions. Frequently, testing can be accomplished in conjunc- tion with other regularly scheduled events, e.g., if the ADP activity closes for the weekend, emergency power down pro- cedures can be tested very effectively when preparing to shut down the system for the weekend. 16. My ADP support is furnished by a service agency (or through interagency agreement). How does contingency planning affect me? It is especially important to consider ADP contingency planning in this case. Do not assume that the ADP activity (whether Governmental or commercial) which normally provides your service will be able to support you if their ADP operation is damaged or destroyed. Quite often, emer- gency support is not part ofthe agreement; consequently, if ADP support is necessary to the successful operation of your function, you must initiate the action to ensvre the availability ofservice during an emergency. Ifa responsive contingency plan is not extant, and emergency support is first sought when needed, days, or even weeks, may be necessary to restore a semblance of normality to your activity. Each activity that receives ADP support should develop a contingency plan to address all aspects of emer- gency coverage, and the plan should be subjected periodical- ly to rigorous testing and review. A key point to remember is that even though day-to-day ADP support from a service 8agency mav be outstanding, it cannot be assumed that similar service will be available if the servicing activity has an emergency situation. 17. My ADP equipment is part ofa distributed data processing (DDP) network. How does contingency planning affect me? Managers of DDP nodes should consider ADP contingency planning from two perspectives: • As a stand-alone entity ifthe equipment is capable of processing applications without being connected to the network. For this situation, contingency planning should be essentiallv the same as that for a large computer center, although obviously the scope may be smaller. Many DDP nodes accomplish considerable stand-alone processing which, routinely, may include ADP systems that are critical to the parent organization. • As an element ofthe DDP network. The contingency plan should reflect the degree of interaction between the node and other computers in the network, and include those actions necessary to be effected when connections are downgraded or severed. Consider eventualities such as one or more communications links severed, one or more of the other nodes down, or various combinations ofboth. During times ofdisruption, some processing may have to be postponed; however, quite often, it is possible to operate in a downgraded (i.e., stand-alone) mode by batching transactions for later transmission. Additionally, alternative routing through other than normally used communications channels may be possible, thus permit- tingcontinuation ofnormal processing. 18. How is contingency planning related to the normal .\DP applicationsystems design process? If, during the initiation, requirements definition, and design phases of systems development, recover)' checkpoints are specified and documented, contingency planning will un- doubtedly be easier to accomplish. For example for recovery purposes, during the course of normal operations, files must be periodically dumped for transfer to the alter- nate storage site. If sufficient recovery checkpoints are designated at the very beginning, a subsequent retrofit oper- ation in the documentation and procedures can be precluded. Effective systems designers and analysts know that no system is completely fail-safe; therefore, they will design such safeguards and procedures into their systems as will facilitate backup and recovery operations when the need arises. 9BIBLIOGRAPHY The following publications deal mostly with ADP contingen- cy planning, but also provide a wide variety of information on varying aspects of computer security. The list is not intended to be all inclusive; rather it is meant to provide those interested in ADP security, particularly contingency planning, with a starting point of publications generally available and pertinent to the task at hand. 1. Broadbent, D., Contingency Planning, The National Comput- ing Centre, Oxford Road, Manchester, United Kingdom (1979). 2. Browne, P. S., Security: Checklist for Computer Center Self Audits, AFIPS Press, Montvale, NJ 07645 (1979). Order from AFIPS, 181.5 N. Lynn St., Suite 800, Arlington, VA 22209. 3. Canning, R., Computer Security: Backup and Recover)- Methods. EDP Analyzer. 10(1);January, 1972. 4. Disaster Preparedness, Office of Emergency Preparedness Report to Congress, Stock Number 4102-0006, Government PrintingOffice, Washington, DC(1972). 5. Guideline for ADP Risk Analysis, National Bureau of Stan- dards (U.S.), Federal Information ProcessingStandards Publi- cation (FIPS PUB) 65, National Technical Information Service, Springfield, VA (1979). 6. Guidelines for ADP Contingency Planning, National Bureau of Standards (U.S.), Federal Information Processing Stan- dards Publication(FIPS PUB)87, NationalTechnical Informa- tion Service, Springfield, VA(1981). 7. Guidelines for ADP Physical Securityand Risk Management, National BureauofStandards(U.S.), Federal Information Pro- cessing Standards Publication (FIPS PUB) 31, National Technical Information Service, Springfield, VA(1974). 8. Lord, K. W., Jr., The Data Center Disaster Consultant, QED Information Sciences, Inc., Wellesley, MA 02181 (1977). 9. Martin, J., Security, Accuracy and Privacy in Computer Systems, Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, NJ(1973). 10. Martincic,J. A., A Disaster Recovery Plan,Journal ofSystem Management, February, 1976. 11. National Bureau of Standards Building Science Series 46, Building Practices for Disaster Mitigation (February, 1973). 12. Nielson, N. R., Ruder, B., Madden, J. D. and Wong, P. J., Computer System Integrity, SRI International, Menio Park, CA (1978). 13. Prichard,J. A. T., Contingency Planning, The National Com- putingCentre(U.K.), ComputerSecurity Services(1976). 14. Reportto the Congress ofthe United States, U.S. General .Ac- counting Office, Most Federal Agencies Have Done Little Planning for ADP Disasters (AFMD-81-16), December 18, 1980. 15. Schabeck, T. A.. Emergency Planning Guide for Data Pro- cessing Centers, Assets Protection Journal, 500 Sutter Street, Suite 503, San Francisco, CA 94102 (1979). 10. 11 I1 T3 03) CO CO 0) . CI c o o 4-1 LO o cCO C o O O -H •H -U c3 o H O -H ^•H I— ^ J 33 — CU , CO o 11 • oH 1u—4 CI. CO o. •H Q CO IS3 w 1 1 CC_i' CO nt3 r— CO s 4-1 c C CO 0) 4J e 0o) u- CO c o <U O! MZ co3 CD O 44 C -- O 11 < c cu CD U CO CO M 4 c-1 (aU i-J •H P3 e M-< 4-1 i-H O Pu D o IOM o C CO in 1W2 Go O cCO O 4J • 4o -H 1 Z1 M-i •H e CO O 4-J CNJ CO c c O c Z 4 c aJ > a• U -H Q > E, C QO J o 13 •H •H w C (U 4 c-» C o - Ta 3 ) (- Ui 4 Co- O1 u 4-> 0) 4-) CO CO c E QC •H CO •H •H c c (U 0) c CO y-i o >-i (-1 -H CO CO (U •H z O D 3J . Od> Oj j 0 t: T3: J O) C 0- O )l 1C t —O u 4 c-1 CE O uD E o- T T<) ) 3-l •4> - H1^ Z4 o-1 CO 13 •H CJ>I.IHUI B Ul o *» I-" 1 I1 K1 3 C !O ^ Z a a- 3 UoJ « g c ° = C -<D I Q £ ». • 3i 2s I u: S $\