A111Q3 IMbEfi? NIST Special Publication 500-169 Computer nist '^^^^^ Systems Exccutivc Guide to the i 'NSTOFSTANDARDS&TECHR.I.C. Protection of Information Resources ^QfC\1f0'0S .- U. 59 7^ N' O^ .< 5f 0^ 0-^ 1e 6^ 9Ml l^ lsM gme VU> ?t Che Io NIST Technology Cheryl Helsing Marianne Swanson Mary Anne Todd_ NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS & TECHNOLOGY Research Information Center he National Institute ofStandards and l^^^ll!ea^b^eta9(^^2g^8§§^^ CongressonMarch 3, 1901. The Institute's overall goal is to strengthenand advancethe Nation'sscience and technology and facilitate theireffective applicationforpublic benefit To this end, the Institute conducts researchto assure interna- tional competitivenessand leadershipofU.S. industry, science and technology. NIST workinvolvesdevelopment andtransfer ofmeasurements, standards and relatedscienceand technology,insupportofcontinually improving U.S. productivity, productquality and reliability, innovation andimderlying science and engineering. TheInstitute's technical work is performedby the National MeasurementLaboratory,the NationalEngineering Laboratory,the National Computer Systems Laboratory, and the Institute for Materials Scienceand Engineering. The National Measurement Laboratory Providesthenational system ofphysical and chemicalmeasurement; Basic Standards^ coordinatesthe system with measurementsystems ofother nations Radiation Research andfurnishes essential services leading to accurate andimiform ChemicalPhysics physical and chemicalmeasurementthroughoutthe Nation'sscientific Analytical Chemistry community, industry, and commerce;provides advisory and research services to other Government agencies;conducts physical and chemical research;develops,produces, and distributes StandardReference Materials;provides calibrationservices; and managesthe National StandardReference Data System. The Laboratory consists ofthe following centers: The National Engineering Laboratory Providestechnologyand technical services to the public and private Computing and Applied sectors to address national needs and to solve nationalproblems; Mathematics conducts researchin engineering and appliedscienceinsupport ofthese Electronics and Electrical efforts; builds and maintains competencein the necessary disciplines Engineering^ required to carryout this research and technical service;developsengi- Manufacturing Engineering neering data and measurement capabilities;providesengineering measure- Building Technology menttraceabilityservices; developstest methodsandproposesengi- Fire Research neering standards and code changes;developsandproposesnew Chemical Engineering' engineeringpractices; and develops and improves mechanismsto transfer resultsofits researchto the ultimateuser. The Laboratory consists ofthe following centers: TheNational Computer Systems Laboratory Conductsresearch andprovides scientific and technical services to aid InformationSystems Federal agenciesin the selection, acquisition, application, anduse of Engineering computertechnologyto improveeffectiveness and economyin Govern- Systems and Software mentoperationsin accordancewithPublic Law 89-306 (40 U.S.C. 759), Technology relevantExecutive Orders, and otherdirectives; carries out this mission Computer Security by managing the FederalInformationProcessing Standards Program, Systems and Network developing Federal ADP standards guidelines, and managing Federal y^chitecture participationin ADP voluntary standardizationactivities; providesscien- Advanced Systems tific and technologicaladvisory services and assistance to Federal agencies;and providesthe technical foundationfor computer-related policiesofthe Federal Government The Laboratory consists ofthe followingdivisions: The Institutefor Materials Science and Engineering Conducts research andprovides measurements, data, standards, refer- Ceramics encematerials, quantitative understanding andother technical informa- Fracture and Deformation' tionfundamental to theprocessing, structure, properties and perfor- Polymers manceofmaterials;addresses the scientific basisfor new advanced Metallurgy materialstechnologies;plansresearch around cross-cutting scientific ReactorRadiation themessuch as nondestructiveevaluationandphasediagramdevelop- ment; overseesInstitute-wide technicalprogramsin nuclearreactor radiationresearchand nondestructive evaluation; andbroadly dissem- inates generic technical informationresulting from its programs. The Institute consists ofthefollowingdivisions: 'HeadquartersandLaboratoriesatGaithersburg,MD,unlessotherwisenoted;mailingaddress MD Gaithersburg, 20899. %omedivisionswithinthecenterarelocatedatBoulder,CO80303. ^LocatedatBoulder,CO,withsomeelementsatGaithersburg,MD.NIST Special Publication 500-169 acfoo (Ji^y , Executive Guide to the c.l^ Protection of Information Resources Cheryl Helsing Deloitte, Haskins & Sells Marianne Swanson MaryAnne Todd National Computer Systerro Laboratory National Institute of StandardsandTechnology Galthersburg. MD 20899 October 1989 U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE RobertA. Mosbacher, Secretary NATIONAL INSTITUTEOFSTANDARDS ANDTECHNOLOGY Raymond G. Kammer, Acting Director NisrReports on Computer Systems Technology The National Institute of Standards andTechnology (NIST) (formerlythe National Bureau ofStandards) has a unique responsibility for computer systems technology within the Federal government. NIST's National Computer Systems Laboratory (NCSL) develops standards and guidelines, provides technical assistance, and conducts research for computers and related telecommunications systems to achieve more effective utilization of Federal information technology resources, NCSL's responsibilities include development of technical, management, physical, and administrative standards and guidelines for the cost-effective security and privacy of sensitive unclassified information processed in Federal computers. NCSL assists agencies in developing security plans and in improving computer securityawarenesstrain- ing.This Special Publication 500 series reports NCSL researchand guidelinesto Federal agenciesaswell as to organizations in industry, government, and academia. Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 89-600762 National Institute of Standards and Technology Special Publication 500-169 Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol. Spec. Publ. 500-169, 20 pages (Oct. 1989) CODEN: NSPUE2 U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE WASHINGTON: 1989 For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC 20402The National Institute ofStandards and Technology (NIST), is responsible for developing stand- ards, providing technical assistance, and conducting research for computers and related telecom- munications systems. These activities provide technical support to government and industry in the effective, safe, and economical use ofcomputers. With the passage ofthe Computer Security Act of 1987 (P.L, 100-235), NIST's activities also include the development ofstandards and guidelines needed to assure the cost-effective security and privacy ofsensitive information in Federal com- puter systems. This guide isjust one ofthree brochures designed for a specific audience. The "Managers Guide to the Protection ofInformation Resources" and the "Computer User's Guide to the Protection ofInformation Resources" complete the series. Acknowledgments & This guide was written by Cheryl Helsing ofDeloitte, Haskins Sells in conjunctionwith Marianne Swanson and Mary Anne Todd, National Institute ofStandards andTechnology.Table of Contents Introduction , 1 Executive Responsibilities 3 Executive Goals 5 Information Protection Program Elements 7 Information Protection Program Implementation 11 For Additional Information 15 VIntroduction Federal agencies are becoming increasingly dependent upon automated information systems to carry out their missions. While in the past, executives have taken a hands-off approach in dealingwith these resources, essentially leaving the area to the computer technologist, they are now recognizing that com- puters and computer-related problems must be understood and managed, the same as any other resource. The success ofan information resources protection program depends on the policy generated, and on the attitude of management toward securing information on automated sys- tems. You, the policy maker, set the tone and the emphasis on how important a role information securitywill have within your agency. Your primary responsibility is to set the information resource security policy for the organizationwith the objectives ofreduced risk, compliance with laws and regulations and as- surance ofoperational continuity, information integrity, and confidentiaHty. Purpose ofthis Guide This guide is designed to help you, the policy maker, address a host ofquestions regarding the protection and safety ofcom- puter systems and dataprocessedwithinyour agency. It intro- duces information systems security concerns, outlines the management issues that must be addressed by agency policies and programs, and describes essential components ofan effec- tive implementationprocess. TheRisks The proliferation ofpersonal computers, local-area networks, and distributed processing has drastically changed the way we manage and control information resources. Internal controls and control points that were present in the past whenwe were dealingwith manual orbatch processes have not always been replaced with comparable controls in many oftoday's automated systems. Reliance upon inadequately controlled in- formation systems can have serious consequences, including: • Inability or impairment ofthe agency's ability to perform its mission 1Introduction • Inability to provide needed services to the public • Waste, loss, misuse, or misappropriation offunds • Loss ofcredibility or embarrassment to an agency To avoid these consequences, a broad set ofinformation security issues must be addressed effectively and comprehen- sively. Towards this end, executives should take a traditional risk management approach, recognizing that risks are taken in the day-to-day management ofan organization, and that there are alternatives to consider in managing these risks. Risk is ac- cepted as part ofdoingbusiness or is reduced or eliminated by modifying operations or by employing control mechanisms.Executive Responsibilities Setthe SecurityPolicyofthe Protecting information resources is an important goal for all or- Organization ganizations. This goal is met by establishing an information resource security program. Itwill require staff, funding and positive incentives to motivate employees to participate in a program to protect these valuable assets. This information resource protection policy should state precisely: • thevalue tothe agencyofdataand informationresources and theneedtopreservetheirintegrity,availability, and confiden- tiality • the intent of the organization to protect the resources from accidental or deliberate unauthorized disclosure, modifica- tion, or destruction by employing cost-effective controls • the assignment ofresponsibility for data security throughout the organization • the requirement to provide computer security and awareness trainingtoallemployeeshavingaccess to informationresour- ces • the intent to hold employees personally accountable for in- formation resources entrusted to them • therequirementtomonitorand assess data securityvia inter- nal and external audit procedures • the penalties for not adhering to the policy 3Executive Goals The policy established for securing information resources should meet the basic goals ofreducing the risk, complying with apphcable laws and regulations, and assuring operational continuity, integrity and confidentiality. This section briefly describes these objectives and how they can be met. ReduceRisk ToAn Acceptable The dollars spent for security measures to control or contain Level losses should never be more than the projected dollar loss if something adverse happened to the information resource. Cost-effective security results when reduction in risk is balanced with the cost ofimplementing safeguards. The greater the value ofinformation processed, or the more severe the consequences ifsomething happens to it, the greater the need for control measures to protect it. It is important that these trade-offs ofcost versus risk reduction be explicitly con- sidered, and that executives understand the degree ofrisk remaining after selected controls are implemented. Assure Operational Continuity With ever-increasing demands for timely information and greater volumes ofinformation being processed, availability of essential systems, networks, and data is a major protection issue. In some cases, service disruptions ofjust a few hours are unacceptable. Agency reliance on essential computer systems requires that advance planning be done to allow timely restora- tion ofprocessing capabilities in the event ofsevere service dis- ruption. The impact due to inability to process data should be assessed, and action taken to assure availability ofthose sys- tems considered essential to agency operation. ComplywithApplicableLaws As the pervasiveness ofcomputer systems increases and the andRegulations risks and vulnerabilities associated with information systems become better understood, the body oflaw and regulations compelling positive action to protect information resources OMB grows. Circular No. A- 130, "Management ofFederal In- formation Systems," and Public Law 100-235, "Computer Security Act of 1987" are two documents where the knowledge ofthese laws provide a baseline for an information resources security program. 5Executive Goals AssureIntegrityand An important objective ofan information resource manage- Confidenticdity ment program is to ensure that the information is accurate. In- tegrity ofinformation meansyou can trust the data and the A processes that manipulate it. system has integritywhen it provides sufficient accuracy and completeness to meet the needs ofthe user(s). It shouldbe properly designed to automate all functional requirements, include appropriate ac- counting and integrity controls, and accommodate the full range ofpotential conditions that might be encountered inits operation. Agency information should also be protected from intruders, as well as from employees with authorized computer access privilegeswho attempt to performunauthorized actions. Assured confidentiahty ofsensitive data is often, but not al- ways, a requirement ofagency systems. Privacy requirements forpersonal information are generally dictated by statute, while protection requirements for other agency information are a function ofthe nature ofthat information. Determina- tion ofrequirements in the latter case is made by the official responsible for that information. The impact ofwrongful dis- closure should be considered inunderstanding confidentiality requirements. 6Information Protection Program Elements NeedforPoliciesand Successful execution ofthe responsibilities previously outlined Procedures requires establishing agency policies and practices regarding in- formationprotection. The security policy directive facilitates consistent protection ofinformation resources. Supporting pro- cedures are most effectively implemented with top manage- ment support, through a program focused on areas ofhighest A risk. compliance assessment process ensures ongoing effec- tiveness ofthe information protectionprogram throughout the agency. Scope Although the protection ofautomated information resources is emphasized in this pubHcation, protection requirements will usually extend to information on all forms ofmedia. Agency programs should apply safeguards to all information requiring protection, regardless ofits form or location. Comprehensive information resource protection procedures will address: accountability for information, vulnerability as- sessment, data access, hardware/software control, systems development, and operational controls. Protection should be afforded throughout the life cycle ofinformation, from crea- tion through ultimate disposition. AccountabilityforInformation An effective information resource protection program iden- tifies the informationused by the agency and assigns primary responsibihty for informationprotection to the managers of .the respective functional areas supported by the data. These managers know the importance ofthe data to the organization and are able to quantify the economic consequences ofun- desirable happenings. They are also able to detect deficiencies in data and know definitivelywho must have access to the data A supporting their operations. fundamental information protec- tion issue is assignment ofaccountability. Information flows throughout the organization and canbe shared by many in- dividuals. This tends to blur accountability and disperse decision-making regarding informationprotection. Accoun- tability should be explicitly assigned for determining and monitoring security for appropriate agency information. 7Information Protection Program Elements When securityviolations occur, management must be account- able for responding and investigating. Securityviolations should trigger a re-evaluation ofaccess authorizations, protec- tion decisions, and control techniques. All apparentviolations should be resolved; since absolute protectionwill never be achieved, some losses are inevitable. It is important, however, that the degree ofrisk assumed be commensurate with the sen- sitivity or importance ofthe information resource to be protected. A VulnerabilityAssessment risk assessment program ensures management that periodic reviews ofinformation resources have considered the degree ofvulnerability to threats causing destruction, modification, dis- closure, and delay ofinformation availability, in making protec- tion decisions and investments in safeguards. The official responsible for a specific information resource determines protection requirements. Less-sensitive, less-essen- tial informationwill require minimal safeguards, while highly sensitive or critical information might merit strict protective measures. Assessment ofvulnerability is essential in specifying cost-effective safeguards; overprotection can be needlessly cost- ly and add unacceptable operational overhead. Once cost-effective safeguards are selected, residual risk - ' remains and is accepted by management. Risk status should be periodically re-examined to identify new threats, vul- nerabilities, or other changes that affect the degree ofrisk that management has previously accepted. DataAccess Access to information should be delegated according to the principles ofneed-to-know and least possible privilege. For a multi-user application system, only individuals with authorized need to view or use data are granted access authority, and they are allowed only the minimumprivileges needed to carry out their duties. For personal computers with one operator, data should be protected from unauthorized viewing or use. It is ' the individual's responsibihty to ensure that the data is secure. 8Information Protection Program Elements Systems Development All information systems software should be developed in a con- trolled and systematic manner according to agency standards. Agency policy should require that appropriate controls for ac- curacy, security, and availability are identified during system design, approved by the responsible official, and implemented. Users who design their own systems, whether on a personal computer or on a mainframe, must adhere to the systems development requirements. Systems should be thoroughly tested according to accepted standards and moved into a secure production environment through a controlled process. Adequate documentation should be considered an integral part ofthe information system and be completed before the system canbe considered ready for use. Hardware/Software Protection ofhardware and resources ofcomputer systems and Configuration Control networks greatly contributes to the overall level ofcontrol and protection ofinformation. The information protection policies should provide substantial direction concerning the manage- ment and control ofcomputer hardware and software. Agency information should be protected from the potentially destructive impact ofunauthorized hardware and software. For example, software "viruses" have been inserted into com- puters through games and apparentlyuseful software acquired viapublic access bulletin boards; viruses can spread from sys- tem to systembefore being detected. Also, unauthorized hardware additions to personal computers can introduce un- known dial-in access paths. Accurate records of hardware/software inventory, configurations, and locations should be maintained, and control mechanisms should provide assurance that unauthorized changes have not occurred. To avoid legal liability, no unauthorized copying ofsoftware should be permitted. Agencies should also address the issue of personal use ofFederal computer systems, giving employees specific direction about allowable use and providing consistent enforcement. 9Information Protection Program Elements Operational Controls Agency standards should clearly communicate minimum ex- pected controls to be present in all computer facilities, com- puter operations, input/output handling, network management, technical support, and user liaison. More stringent controls would apply to those areas that process very sensitive or critical information. Protection ofthese areaswould include: • Security management; • Physical security; • Security ofsystem/application software and data; • Network security; and • Contingencyplanning. The final section ofthis guide describes the organizational process ofdeveloping, implementing, and managing the ongo- ing informationprotectionprogram. 10Information Protection Program Implementation Information Protection In most cases, agenq^ executive management is not directly in- Management volved in the details ofachieving a controlled information processing environment. Instead, executive action should focus on effective planning, implementation, and an ongoing review structure. Usually, an explicit group or organization is assigned specific responsibility for providing day-to-day guidance and direction ofthis process. Within this group an in- formation security manager (ISM) should be identified as a per- manent focal point for information protection issues within the agency. The ISM must be thoroughly familiarwith the agency mission, organization, and operation. The manager should have suffi- cient authority to influence the organization and have access to agency executives when issues require escalation. Independence In determining the reporting relationship ofthe ISM, inde- pendence offunctional areas within the agency is desirable. Plans and budget for the ISM function should be approved by agency management, rather than being part ofany functional area budget. This approach avoids conflicts ofinterest and facilitates development and maintenance ofa comprehensive and consistent protection program that serves the needs of agency management. Degree ofCentralization The desirability ofcentralized versus decentralized security is heavily debated and largely depends on size, organizational structure, and management approach at the individual agency. A centralized approach to security has the advantages ofbeing directly responsive to executive direction and specifically ac- countable for progress and status. A decentralized approach to security has the advantages of being close to the functional area involved. In the long term, decentralization may provide better integration ofsecurity with other entity functions. 11Information Protection Program Implementation An effective combined approach offers advantages. A small dedicated resource at the agency level can direct the informa- tion protectionprogram, while additional resources are utilized at the functional arealevel to implement the program in each area. DedicatedStaff The common practice ofassigning responsibility for informa- tion security to existing staffwith other major responsibilities is often unsuccessful. At least one dedicated staffmember is recommended at the program management level. The need for additional full-time resources depends on the agency's computer environment. The number ofinformation systems, their technical complexity, the degree ofnetworking, the importance ofinformationprocessed, adequacy ofexisting controls, and extent ofagency dependence on information sys- tems affect the resources needed. Implementation Stages Development ofa comprehensive information protection program that is practiced and observedwidely throughout a Federal agency occurs in stages and requires ongoing monitor- ing and maintenance to remainviable. First, organizational requirements for informationprotection are identified. Different agencies have varying levels ofneed for security, and the informationprotectionprogram should be structured to most effectively meet those needs. Next, organizational policies are developed that provide a security architecture for agency operations, taking into con- sideration the informationprotection program elements dis- cussed in the previous section ofthis guide. The policies under- go normal review procedures, then are approved by agency management for implementation. Activities are then initiated to bring the agency into com- pHance with the pohcies. Depending on the degree of centralization, this might require development offurther plans and budgets within functional entities ofthe agency to imple- ment the necessary logical and physical controls. 12Information Protection Program Implementation Training Training is a major activity in the implementation process. Securityviolations are the result ofhuman action, and problems can usuallybe identified in their earliest stages by people. Developing and maintaining personnel awareness of information security issues canyield large benefits in preven- tion and early detection ofproblems and losses. Target audiences for this training are executives and policy makers, program and functional managers, IRM security and audit personnel, computer management and operations, and end users. Training can be delivered through existing policy and procedures manuals, written materials, presentations and classes, and audio-visual training programs. The training provided should create an awareness ofrisks and the importance ofsafeguards, underscoring the specific respon- sibilities ofeach ofthe individuals being trained. MonitoringandEnforcement An ongoing monitoring and enforcement program assures con- tinued effectiveness ofinformation protection measures. Compliance may be measured in a number ofways, including audits, management reviews or self-assessments, surveys, and A other informal indicators. combination ofmonitoring mechanisms provides greater reliability ofresults. Variances from poHcy requirements should be accepted only in caseswhere the responsible official has evaluated, docu- mented, and accepted the risk ofnoncompHance. Enforce- ment ofagency policies and practices is important to the over- all success ofan informationprotectionprogram. Inconsistent or lax enforcement quickly results in deterioration ofinternal controls over information resources. A positive benefit ofan effective monitoring and enforcement process is an increased understanding ofthe degree ofinforma- tion-related risk in agency operations. Without such a feed- backprocess, management unknowingly accepts too much risk. An effective informationprotectionprogram allows the agency to continue to relyupon and expand the use ofinformation technologywhile maintaining an acceptable level ofrisk. 13Information Protection Program implementation Maintenance As agency initiatives and operations change, and as the com- puter environment evolves, some elements ofthe information protectionprogramwill require change as well. Information protection cannot be viewed as a project with a distinct end; rather, it is a process that should be maintained to be realistic and useful to the agency. Procedures for review and update of policies and otherprogram elements should be developed and followed. 143 For Additional Information National Institute OfStandards andTechnology Computer Security Program Office A-216 Technology MD Gaithersburg, 20899 (301) 975-5200 For further information on the management ofinformation resources, NISTpubhshes Federal In- formation Processing Standards PubUcations (FIBS PUBS). These publications dealwith many aspects ofcomputer security, including password usage, data encryption, ADP risk management A and contingency planning, and computer system security certification and accreditation. list of currentpublications is available from: Standards Processing Coordinator (ADP) National Computer Systems Laboratory National Institute ofStandards andTechnology Technology Building, B-64 MD Gaithersburg, 20899 Phone: (301) 975-2817 15 * U.S.GOVERNMENT PRINTING 0FFI CE i 1 989-26t-93 1/0007NBS-n4A (REV. 2-ec) U.S. DEPT. OF COMM. I. PUBLICATION OR 2. Performing Organ. Report No. 3. Publication Date REPORT NO. BIBLIOGRAPHIC DATA SHEET(See instructions) NIST/SP-500/169 October 1989 4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE Executive Guide To The Protection of Information Resources AUTHOR(S) 5. Cheryl Helsing, Marianne Swanson, and Mary Anne Todd 6. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION (Ifjoint or other than NBS. see instructions) 7. Contract/Grant No. NATIONALINSmrUTEOFSTANDARDSANDTECHNOLOGY <formorlyNATIONALBUREAUOFSTANDARDS) S. Type of Report& Period Covered U.S.DEPARTMENTOFCOMMERCE QAITHERSBURG,MD20899 Final 9. SPONSORING ORGANIZATION NAME AND COMPLETE ADDRESS (Street. City, State, ZIP) Same as item #6 10. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 89-600762 Document describes a computer program; SF-185, FIPS Software Summary, Is attached. I I 11. ABSTRACT (A 200-word or less factual summary ofmost significant information. If document includes a significant bibliography or literature survey, mention it here) The Executive Guide outlines the areas that the policy makers must address regarding the protection of computer systems and the information processed within them. The key to a successful policy on information resource protection is for top management to understand all the issues involved. This document explains what should be addressed in agency policy and where it best fits within an organization. 12. KEY WORDS (Six to twelve entries; alphabetical order; capitalize only proper names; and separate key words by semicolons) confidentiality; controls; information resources; integrity; policy; responsibilities; risks; security mechanisms 13. AVAILABILITY 14. NO. OF PRINTED PAGES Unlimited 20 For Official Distribution. Do Not Release to NTIS I I f"A| O 2r 04d 0e 2r .From Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C. 15. Price Order From National Technical Information Service (NTIS), Springfield, VA. 22161 I USCOMM-DC 6043-P80ANNOUNCEMENT OF NEW PUBLICATIONS ON COMPUTER SYSTEMS TECHNOLOGY Superintendent of Documents Government Printing Office Washington, DC 20402 Dear Sir: Please add my name to the announcement list of new publications to be issued in the series: National Institute of Standards and Technology Special Publication 500-. Name Company Address City State Zip Code (Notification key N-503)i J.t<y JL Technical Publications Periodical — Journal of Research of the National Institute of Standards and Technology Reports NIST research and development in those disciplines ofthe physical and engineering sciences in which the Institute is active. These include physics, chemistry, engineering, mathematics, and computer sciences. Papers cover a broad range ofsubjects, with major emphasis on measurement methodology and the basic technology underlying standardization. Also included from time to time are survey articles on topics closely related to the Institute's technical and scientific programs. Issued six times a year. Nonperiodicals — Monographs Major contributions to the technical literature on various subjects related to the Institute's scientific and technical activities. — Handbooks Recommended codes ofengineering and industrial practice (including safety codes) de- veloped in cooperation with interested industries, professional organizations, and regulatory bodies. — Special Publications Include proceedings of conferences sponsored by NIST, NIST annual reports, and other special publications appropriate to this grouping such as wall charts, pocket cards, and bibliographies. — Applied Mathematics Series Mathematical tables, manuals, and studies ofspecial interest to physi- cists, engineers, chemists, biologists, mathematicians, computer programmers, and others engaged in scientific and technical work. — National Standard Reference Data Series Provides quantitative data on the physical and chemical properties ofmaterials, compiled from the world's literature and critically evaluated. Developed un- der a worldwide program coordinated by NIST under the authority ofthe National Standard Data Act (Public Law 90-396). NOTE: The Journal of Physical and Chemical Reference Data (JPCRX)) is published quarterly for NIST by the American Chemical Society (ACS) and the American Insti- tute ofPhysics (AIP). Subscriptions, reprints, and supplements are available from ACS, 1155 Six- teenth St., NW., Washington, DC 20056. — Building Science Series Disseminates technical information developed at the Institute on building materials, components, systems, and whole structures. The series presents research results, test methods, and performance criteria related to the structural and environmental functions and the durability and safety characteristics ofbuilding elements and systems. — Technical Notes Studies or reports which are complete in themselves but restrictive in their treat- ment ofa subject. Analogous to monographs but not so comprehensive in scope or defmitive in treatment ofthe subject area. Often serve as a vehicle for final reports ofwork performed at NIST under the sponsorship ofother government agencies. — Voluntary Product Standards Developed under procedures published by the Department ofCom- merce in Part 10, Title 15, ofthe Code ofFederal Regulations. The standards establish nationally recognized requirements for products, and provide all concerned interests with a basis for common understanding ofthe characteristics ofthe products. NIST administers this program as a supplement to the activities ofthe private sector standardizing organizations. — Consumer Information Series Practical information, based on NIST research and experience, cov- ering areas ofinterest to the consumer. Easily understandable language and illustrations provide use- ful background knowledge for shopping in today's technological marketplace. Order the above NISTpublicationsfrom: Superintendent ofDocuments, Government Printing Office, DC Washington, 20402. — Order the following NISTpublications FIPS and NISTIRs—from the National TechnicalInformation Service, Springfield, VA 22161. Federal Information Processing Standards Publications (FIPS PUB)— Publications in this series col- lectively constitute the Federal Information Processing Standards Register. The Register serves as the official source ofinformation in the Federal Government regarding standards issued by NIST pursuant to the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949 as amended. Public Law 89-306 (79 Stat. 1127), and as implemented by Executive Order 11717 (38 FR 12315, dated May 11, 1973) and Part 6 ofTitle 15 CFR (Code ofFederal Regulations). NIST Interagency Reports (NISTIR)—A special series ofinterim or final reports on work performed by NIST for outside sponsors (both government and non-government). In general, initial distribu- tion is handled by the sponsor; public distribution is by the National Technical Information Service, VA Springfield, 22161, in paper copy or microfiche form.U.S. Department of Commerce National Institute of Standards andTechnology (formerly National Bureau of Standards) Galthersburg, MD 20899 Official Business Penaltyfor Private Use$300