e m NIST Special Publication 500-170 aiiiQ3 l b i ^ X— PUBLICATIONS ....iMiuiiiiiiiii Management Gui.de to the Technology Protection of Information U.S. DEPARTMENTOF COMMERCE Resources National Instituteof Standards and Technology _^_ M Cheryl Helsing r^Jl^St! Marianne Swanson Mary Anne Toddrhe National Institute ofStandards and Technology1 was establishedby an actofCongresson March 3, 1901. The Institute's overall goal is to strengthen and advance the Nation's science and technology and facilitatetheir effective applicationfor publicbenefit. To this end, the Institute conducts research to assure interna- tional competitiveness and leadershipofU.S. industry, science and technology. NIST work involves development and transfer ofmeasurements, standards and relatedscience and technology, in supportofcontinually improving U.S. productivity, product quality and reliability, innovation andunderlying science and engineering. The Institute's technical work is performedby the National Measurement Laboratory, the National Engineering Laboratory,the National Computer Systems Laboratory, and the Institute for Materials Science and Engineering. The National Measurement Laboratory Provides the national system ofphysical and chemical measurement; Basic Standards2 coordinatesthesystem with measurementsystems ofother nations Radiation Research and furnishes essential services leading to accurate and uniform Chemical Physics physical and chemical measurementthroughout the Nation's scientific Analytical Chemistry community, industry, and commerce;provides advisory and research services to other Government agencies; conductsphysical and chemical research;develops, produces, and distributes Standard Reference Materials;provides calibrationservices; and managesthe National Standard Reference Data System. The Laboratory consists ofthe following centers: The National Engineering Laboratory Provides technology and technical services to thepublic andprivate Computing and Applied sectorsto address national needs and to solve national problems; Mathematics conducts researchin engineering and appliedscience insupportofthese Electronics and Electrical efforts; builds and maintains competencein the necessary disciplines Engineering2 required to carry out this research and technical service; developsengi- Manufacturing Engineering neering data and measurement capabilities;provides engineering measure- Building Technology ment traceability services; developstest methods andproposesengi- Fire Research neering standards and code changes;develops andproposesnew Chemical Engineering3 engineeringpractices; and develops and improves mechanisms to transfer results ofits researchto the ultimate user. The Laboratory consists ofthe following centers: The National Computer Systems Laboratory Conducts research andprovides scientific and technical services to aid InformationSystems Federal agenciesin the selection, acquisition, application, and use of Engineering computer technology to improve effectiveness and economy in Govern- Systems and Software ment operationsin accordancewith Public Law 89-306 (40 U.S.C. 759), Technology relevantExecutive Orders, and other directives; carriesout this mission Computer Security by managing the Federal InformationProcessing Standards Program, Systems and Network developing Federal ADP standards guidelines, and managing Federal Architecture participationin ADP voluntary standardization activities; provides scien- Advanced Systems tific and technological advisory services and assistance to Federal agencies;and provides the technical foundation for computer-related policiesofthe Federal Government The Laboratory consists ofthe following divisions: The Institutefor Materials Science and Engineering Conducts research andprovides measurements, data, standards, refer- Ceramics encematerials, quantitative understanding and other technical informa- Fracture and Deformation3 tion fundamental to theprocessing, structure, properties andperfor- Polymers manceofmaterials; addressesthe scientific basis for new advanced Metallurgy materialstechnologies;plansresearch around cross-cutting scientific Reactor Radiation themessuch as nondestructive evaluation and phase diagramdevelop- ment; overseesInstitute-wide technical programsin nuclear reactor radiationresearch andnondestructive evaluation; and broadly dissem- inates generic technical information resulting fromits programs. The Institute consists ofthefollowing divisions: 'HeadquartersandLaboratoriesatGaithersburg,MD,unlessotherwisenoted;mailingaddress MD Gaithersburg, 20899. ^ 3Lo om ce atd ei dvi as tio Bn os ulw di et rh ,in COth ,e wc ie tn hte sr oa mr eel eo lc ea mt ee nd tsat atBo Gu al id te hr e, rsC buO rg8 ,03 M0 D3. . INSm^EOF^AND_ A. n Rn ^n *a NATIONAL Cestet Research Information MD ARR» Gaithersburg,^00 NIST Special Publication 500-1 70 ^.<Tfjt^nc Management Guide to the Protection of Information Resources Cheryl Helsing Deloltte, Haskins & Sells Marianne Swanson MaryAnne Todd National Computer Systems Laboratory National Institute of StandardsandTechnology Galthersburg, MD 20899 October 1989 DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE U.S. RobertA. Mosbacher, Secretary NATIONAL INSTITUTEOFSTANDARDS ANDTECHNOLOGY Raymond G. Kammer, Acting Director NETReports on Computer Systems Technology The National Institute ofStandards andTechnology (NIST) (formerlythe National Bureau of Standards) has a unique responsibility for computer systems technology within the Federal government. NIST's National Computer Systems Laboratory (NCSL) develops standards and guidelines, provides technical assistance, and conducts research for computers and related telecommunications systems to achieve more effective utilization of Federal information technology resources. NCSL's responsibilities include development of technical, management, physical, and administrative standards and guidelines for the cost-effective security and privacy of sensitive unclassified information processed in Federal computers. NCSL assists agencies in developing security plans and in improving computer securityawarenesstrain- ing.ThisSpecial Publication 500 series reports NCSL researchand guidelinesto Federal agenciesaswell as to organizations in industry, government, and academia. Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 89-600763 National Institute of Standards and Technology Special Publication 500-170 Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol. Spec. Publ. 500-170, 20 pages (Oct. 1989) CODEN: NSPUE2 U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE WASHINGTON: 1989 For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC 20402The National Institute ofStandards and Technology (NIST), is responsible for developing stand- ards, providing technical assistance, and conducting research for computers and related systems. These activities provide technical support to government and industry in the effective, safe, and economical use ofcomputers. With the passage ofthe Computer Security Act of 1987 (P.L. 100- 235), NIST's activities also include the development ofstandards and guidelines needed to assure the cost-effective security and privacy ofsensitive information in Federal computer systems. This guide represents one activity towards the protection and management ofsensitive information resources. Acknowledgments & This guide was written by Cheryl Helsing ofDeloitte, Haskins Sells in conjunctionwith Marianne Swanson and Mary Anne Todd, National Institute ofStandards and Technology.Summary Executive Today computers are integral to all aspects of operations within an organization. As Federal agencies are becoming criti- cally dependent upon computer information systems to carry out their missions, the agency executives (policy makers) are recognizing that computers and computer-related problems must be understood and managed, the same as any other resource. They are beginning to understand the importance of setting policies, goals, and standards for protection ofdata, in- formation, and computer resources, and are committing resour- ces for information security programs. They are also learning that primary responsibility for data security must rest with the managers ofthe functional areas supported by the data. All managers who use any type ofautomated information resource system must become familiar with their agency's policies and procedures for protecting the informationwhich is processed and stored within them. Adequately secure systems deter, prevent, or detect unauthorized disclosure, modification, or use ofinformation. Agency information requires protection from intruders, as well as from employees with authorized com- puter access privileges who attempt to perform unauthorized actions. Protection is achieved not only by technical, physical and personnel safeguards, but also by clearly articulating and implementing agency policy regarding authorized system use to informationusers and processing personnel at all levels. This guide is one ofthree brochures that have been designed for a specific audience. The "Executive Guide to the Protection of Information Resources" and the "Computer User's Guide to the Protection ofInformation Resources" complete the series. vTable of Contents Executive Summary v Introduction 1 Purpose of Guide 1 The Risks 1 Responsibilities 2 Information Systems Development 5 Control Decisions 5 Security Principles 5 Access Decisions 7 Systems Development Process 7 Computer Facility Management 9 Physical Security 9 Data Security 11 Monitoring and Review 11 Personnel Management 13 Personnel Security 13 Training 14 For Additional Information 15 viiIntroduction Purpose ofthis Guide This guide introduces information systems security concerns and outlines the issues that must be addressed by all agency managers in meeting their responsibilities to protect informa- tion systems within their organizations. It describes essential components ofan effective information resource protection process that applies to a stand alone personal computer or to a large data processing facility. TheRisks Effort is required by every Federal agency to safeguard infor- mation resources and to reduce risks to a prudent level. The spread ofcomputingpower to individual employees via per- sonal computers, local-area networks, and distributed process- ing has drastically changed the waywe manage and control in- formation resources. Internal controls and control points that were present in the pastwhenwe were dealingwith manual or batch processes have not been established in many oftoday's automated systems. Reliance upon inadequately controlled computer systems can have serious consequences, including: • Inability or impairment ofthe agency's ability to perform its mission • Inability to provide needed services to the public • Waste, loss, misuse, or misappropriation offunds • Loss ofcredibility or embarrassment to an agency To avoid these consequences, a broad set ofinformation security issues must be effectively and comprehensively ad- dressed. 1Introduction Responsibilities All functional managers have a responsibility to implement the policies and goals established by executive management for protection ofautomated information resources (data, proces- ses, facilities, equipment, personnel, and information). Managers in all areas ofan organization are clearly account- able for the protection ofany ofthese resources assigned to them to enable them to perform their duties. They are respon- sible for developing, administering, monitoring, and enforcing internal controls, including security controls, within their as- signed areas ofauthority. Each manager's specific respon- sibilities willvary, depending on the role that manager has with regard to computer systems. Portions ofthis document provide more detailed information on the respective security responsibilities ofmanagers ofcom- puter resources, managers responsible for information systems applications and the personnel security issues involved. However, all agency management must strive to: Achieve Cost-Effective Security The dollars spent for security measures to control or contain losses should never be more than the projected dollar loss if something adverse happened to the information resource. Cost- effective security results when reduction in risk through im- plementation ofsafeguards is balanced with costs. The greater the value ofinformation processed, or the more severe the con- sequences ifsomething happens to it, the greater the need for control measures to protect it. The personwho canbest determine the value or importance of data is the functional managerwho is responsible for the data. For example, the manager responsible for the agency's budget program is the one who should establish requirements for the protection ofthe automated datawhich supports the program. This manager knows better than anyone else in the organiza- tionwhat the impactwill be ifthe data is inaccurate or unavail- able. Additionally, this manager usually is the supervisor of most ofthe users ofthe data. 2Introduction It is important that these trade-offs ofcost versus risk reduc- tion be explicitly considered, and that management understand the degree ofrisk remaining after selected controls are imple- mented. Assure Operational Continuity With ever-increasing demands for timely information and greatervolumes ofinformation being processed, the threat of information system disruption is avery serious one. In some cases, interruptions ofonly a few hours are unacceptable. The impact due to inability to process data should be assessed, and actions should be taken to assure availability ofthose systems considered essential to agency operation. Functional manage- ment must identify critical computer applications and develop contingency plans so that the probability ofloss of data process- ing and telecommunications support is minimized. Maintain Integrity Integrity ofinformation means you can trust the data and the processes that manipulate it. Not only does this mean that er- rors and omissions are minimized, but also that the informa- tion system is protected from deliberate actions to wrongfully change the data. Information can be said to have integritywhen it corresponds to the expectations and assumptions ofthe users. Assure Confidentiality Confidentiality ofsensitive data is often, but not always, a re- quirement ofagency systems. Privacy requirements for per- sonal information is dictated by statute, while confidentiality of other agency information is determined by the nature ofthat in- formation, e.g., information submitted by bidders in procure- ment actions. The impact ofwrongful disclosure must be con- sidered in understanding confidentiality requirements. Comply with Applicable Laws and Regulations As risks and vulnerabilities associated with information sys- tems become better understood, the body oflaw and regula- tions compelling positive action to protect information resour- OMB ces grows. Circular No. A- 130, "Management ofFederal Information Resources" and Public Law 100-235, "Computer Security Act of 1987" are two documents where the knowledge ofthese regulations and laws provide a baseline for an informa- tion resource security program. 3Information Systems Development This section describes the protective measures that should be included as part ofthe design and development ofinformation processing application systems. The functional manager that is responsible for and will use the information contained in the system, must ensure that security measures have been included and are adequate. This includes applications designed for per- sonal computers as well as large mainframes. ControlDecisions The official responsible for the agency function served by the automated information system has a critical role in making decisions regarding security and control. In the past, riskwas often unconsciously accepted when such individuals assumed the computer facility operators were taking care ofsecurity. In fact, there are decisions to be made and security elements to be provided that cannot be delegated to the operator ofthe sys- tem. In many cases, the user or manager develops the applica- tion and operates solely. The cost ofcontrol must be balanced with system efficiency and usability issues. Risk must be evaluated and cost-effective controls selected to provide a prudent level ofcontrol while maximizing productivity. Controls are often closely connected with the system function, and cannot be effectively designed without significant understanding ofthe process being automated. SecurityPrinciples There are some common security attributes that should be present in any system that processes valuable personal or sensi- tive information. System designs should include mechanisms to enforce the following security attributes. 5Information Systems Development Identification and Authentication of Users Each user ofa computer system should have a unique iden- tification on the system, such as an account number or other user identification code. There must also be a means ofverify- ing that the individual claiming that identity (e.g., by typing in that identifying code at a terminal) is really the authorized in- dividual and not an imposter. The most common means of authentication is by a secret password, known only to the authorized user. Authorization Capability Enforcing the Principle of Least Possible Privilege Beyond ensuring that only authorized individuals can access the system, it is also necessary to limit the users access to infor- mation and transaction capabilities. Each person should be limited to only the information and transaction authority that is required by theirjob responsibilities. This concept, known as the principle ofleastpossible privilege, is a long-standing con- trol practice. There should be away to easily assign each user just the specific access authorities needed. Individual Accountability Fromboth a control and legal point ofview, it is necessary to maintain records ofthe activities performed by each computer user. The requirements for automated audit trails should be developedwhen a system is designed. The information to be recorded depends onwhat is significant about each particular system. To be able to hold individuals accountable for their ac- tions, there must be a positive means ofuniquely identifying each computer user and a routinely maintained record ofeach user's activities. Audit Mechanisms Audit mechanisms detectunusual events and bring them to the attention ofmanagement. This commonly occurs byviolation reporting orby an immediate warning to the computer system operator. The type ofalarm generated depends on the serious- ness ofthe event. Acommon technique to detect access attempts by un- authorized individuals is to count attempts. The security monitoring functions ofthe system can automatically keep track ofunsuccessful attempts to gain access and generate an alarm ifthe attempts reach an unacceptable number. 6Information Systems Development Performance Assurance A basic design consideration for any information system should be the ability to verify that the system is functioning as in- tended. Systems that are developed without such design con- siderations are often very difficult to independently audit or review, leading to the possibility ofunintended results or inac- curate processing. Recoverability Because Federal agencies can potentially be heavily dependent on a computer system, an important design consideration is the ability to easily recover from troublesome events, whether minor problems or major disruptions ofthe system. From a designpoint ofview, systems should be designed to easily recover from minor problems, and to be either transportable to another backup computer system or replaced by manual processes in case ofmajor disruption or loss ofcomputer facility. AccessDecisions Once the automated system is ready to use, decisions must be made regarding access to the system and the information it con- tains. For example, many individuals require the ability to ac- cess and view data, but not the ability to change or delete data. Even when computer systems have been designed to provide the ability to narrowly designate access authorities, a knowledgeable and responsible official must actually make those access decisions. The care that is taken in this process is a major determining factor ofthe level ofsecurity and control present in the system. Ifsensitive data is being transmitted over unprotected lines, it canbe intercepted or passive eavesdrop- ping can occur. Encrypting the files will make the data unintel- ligible and portprotection devices will protect the files from unauthorized access, ifwarranted. SystemsDevelopmentProcess All information systems software should be developed in a con- trolled and systematic manner according to agency standards. The quality and efficiency ofthe dataprocessed, and the pos- sible reconfiguration ofthe system can all be affected by an in- adequate development process. The risk ofsecurity exposures and vulnerabilities is greatly reduced when the systems development process is itselfcontrolled. 7Computer Management Facility Functional managers play a critical role in assuring that agency information resources are appropriately safeguarded. This sec- tion describes the protective measures that should be incor- porated into the ongoing management ofinformation resource OMB processing facilities. As defined in Circular No. A-130, "Management ofFederal Information Resources," the term "in- formation technology facility" means an organizationally defined set ofpersonnel, hardware, software, and physical facilities, a primary function ofwhich is the operation ofinfor- mation technology. This section, therefore applies to any managerwho houses a personal computer, mainframe or any other form ofoffice system or automated equipment. Physical Security Information cannot be appropriatelyprotected unless the facilities that house the equipment are properly protected from physical threats and hazards. The major areas ofconcern are described below. Environmental Conditions For many types ofcomputer equipment, strict environmental conditions mustbe maintained. Manufacturer's specifications should be observed for temperature, humidity, and electrical power requirements. Control of Media The mediauponwhich information is stored should be careful- ly controlled. Transportable media such as tapes and cartridges should be kept in secure locations, and accurate records kept ofthe location and disposition ofeach. In addition, media from an external source should be subject to a check-inprocess to ensure it is from an authorized source. 9Computer Facility Management Control of Physical Hazards Each area should be surveyed for potential physical hazards. Fire andwater are two ofthe most damaging forces with regard to computer systems. Opportunities for loss should be mini- mized by an effective fire detection and suppression mechanism, and planning reduces the danger ofleaks or flood- ing, Other physical controls include reducing the visibility of the equipment and strictly limiting access to the area or equip- ment. Contingency Planning Although risks can be minimized, they cannot be eliminated. When reliance upon a computer facility or application is sub- stantial, some type ofcontingency plan should be devised to allow critical systems to be recovered following a major dis- aster, such as a fire. There are a number ofalternative ap- proaches that should be evaluated to most cost-effectively meet the agency's need for continuity ofservice. Configuration Management Risk can be introduced through unofficial and unauthorized hardware or software. Another key component ofinformation resource management is ensuring only authorized hardware and software are being utilized. There are several control is- sues to be addressed. Maintaining Accurate Records Records ofhardware/software inventories, configurations, and locations should be maintained and kept up-to-date. Complying with Terms of Software Licenses Especiallywith microcomputer software, illegal copying and other uses in conflictwith licensing agreements are concerns. The use ofsoftware subject to licensing agreements must be monitored to ensure it is used according to the terms ofthe agreement. 10Computer Facility Management Protecting Against Malicious Software and Hardware The recent occurrences ofdestructive computer "viruses" point to the need to ensure that agencies do not allow unauthorized software to be introduced to their computer environments. Un- authorized hardware can also contain hidden vulnerabilities. Management should adopt a strong policy against unauthorized hardware/software, inform personnel about the risks and conse- quences ofunauthorized additions to computer systems, and develop a monitoringprocess to detect violations ofthe policy. Data Security Management must ensure that appropriate security mechanisms are inplace that allow responsible officials to designate access to data according to individual computer users' specific needs. Security mechanisms should be sufficient to implement individual authentication ofsystem users, allow authorization to specific information and transaction authorities, maintain audit trails as specified by the responsible official, and encrypt sensitive files ifrequired by user manage- ment. A MonitoringandReview final aspect ofinformation resource protection to be con- sidered is the need for ongoing management monitoring and review. To be effective, a security program must be a con- tinuous effort. Ideally, ongoing processes should be adapted to include information protection checkpoints and reviews. Infor- mation resource protection should be a key consideration in all major computer system initiatives. Earlier, the need for system audit trails was discussed. Those audit trails are useful only ifmanagement regularly reviews ex- ception items or unusual activities. Irregularities should be re- searched and action takenwhen merited. Similarly, all informa- tion-related losses and incidents should be investigated. 11Computer Facility Management A positive benefit ofan effective monitoring process is an in- creased understanding ofthe degree ofinformation-related risk in agency operations. Without an ongoing feedback process, management mayunknowingly accept too much risk. Prudent decisions about trade-offs between efficiency and con- trol can onlybe madewith a clear understanding ofthe degree ofinherent risk. Every manager should ask questions and peri- odically review operations tojudge whether changes in the en- vironment have introduced new risk, and to ensure that con- trols are working effectively. 12Personnel Management Managers must be aware that information security is more a people issue than a technical issue. Personnel are a vital link in the protection ofinformation resources, as information is gathered by people, entered into information resource systems by people, and ultimately used by people. Security issues should be addressed with regard to: • People who use computer systems and store information in the course oftheir normaljob responsibilities • People who design, program, test, and implement critical or sensitive systems • People who operate computer facilities that process critical or sensitive data Personnel Security From the point ofhire, individuals who will have routine access to sensitive information resources should be subject to special security procedures. More extensive background or reference checks may be appropriate for such positions, and security responsibilities should be explicitly covered in employee orien- tations. Position descriptions and performance evaluations should also explicitly reference unusual responsibilities affect- ing the security ofinformation resources. Individuals in sensitive positions should be subject tojob rota- tion, and work flow should be designed in such away as to provide as much separation ofsensitive functions as possible. Upon decision to terminate or notice ofresignation, expedited termination or rotation to less sensitive duties for the remainder of employment is a reasonable precaution. Any Federal computer user who deliberately performs or at- tempts to perform unauthorized activity should be subject to disciplinary action, and such disciplinary action must be uniformly applied throughout the agency. Any criminal activity under Federal or state computer crime laws must be reported to law enforcement authorities. 13Most information resource securityproblems involve people. Problems canusuallybe identified in their earliest stages by people who are attuned to the importance ofinformation A protection issues. strong trainingprogramwillyield large benefits in prevention and early detection ofproblems and los- ses. To be most effective, training should be tailored to the par- ticular audience being addressed, e.g., executives and policy makers; program and functional managers; IRM security and audit: ADP management and operations; end users. Most employeeswant to do the right thing, ifagency expecta- tions are clearly communicated. Internal policies can be en- forced only ifstaffhave been made aware oftheir individual responsibilities. All personnel who access agency computer sys- tems should be aware oftheir responsibilities under agency policy, as well as obligations under the law. Disciplinary actions and legal penalties should be communicated.For Additional Information National Institute Of Standards and Technology Computer Security Program Office A-216 Technology MD Gaithersburg, 20899 (301) 975-5200 For further information on the management ofinformation resources, NISTpublishes Federal In- formation Processing Standards Publications (FIBS PUBS). These publications deal with many aspects ofcomputer security, including password usage, data encryption, ADP risk management A and contingency planning, and computer system security certification and accreditation. list of current publications is available from: Standards Processing Coordinator (ADP) National Computer Systems Laboratory National Institute of Standards and Technology Technology Building, B-64 MD Gaithersburg, 20899 Phone: (301) 975-2817 15 ^ U . S.GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICEi 1989—261—913/00074. ANNOUNCEMENT OF NEW PUBLICATIONS ON COMPUTER SYSTEMS TECHNOLOGY Superintendent of Documents Government Printing Office Washington, DC 20402 Dear Sir: Please add my name to the announcement list of new publications to be issued in the series: National Institute of Standards and Technology Special Publication 500- Name Company Address City State Zip Code (Notification key N-503)NBS-114A (rev. 2-80) U.S. DEPT. OF COMM. 1. PUBLICATION OR 2. Performing Organ. Report No 3. Publication Date REPORT NO. BIBLIOGRAPHIC DATA NIST/SP-500/170 October 1989 SHEET(See instructions) 4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE Management Guide To The Protection of Information Resources AUTHOR(S) 5. Cheryl Helsing, Marianne Swanson, and Mary Anne Todd 6. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION (Ifjoint or other than NBS. see instructions) 7. Contract/Grant No. NATIONALINSTITUTEOFSTANDARDSANDTECHNOLOGY ( U.f So .rm De Erl Py AN RA TT MI EO NN TAL OFBU CR OE MA MU EROF CESTANDARDS) 8. Type of Report & Period Covered OAITHERSBURG,MD20899 Final 9. SPONSORING ORGANIZATION NAME AND COMPLETE ADDRESS (Street. City. State. ZIP) Same as item #6 SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES 10. Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 89-600763 Document describes a computer program; SF-185, FlPS Software Summary, is attached. I | 11. ABSTRACT(A 200-word or less factual summary ofmost significant information. If document includes a significant bibliography or literature survey, mention it here) The primary responsibility for data security rests with the managers of the functional areas supported by the data. This booklet introduces information system security concerns, and describes the essential components of an effective information resource protection process. 12. KEY WORDS (Six to twelve entries; alphabetical order; capitalize only proper names; and separate key words by semicolons) confidentiality; configuration management; controls; functional managers; information resources; integrity; personnel security; physical security; responsibilities; risks; security mechanisms 13. AVAILABILITY 14. NO. OF PRINTED PAGES [jp Unlimited For Official Distribution. Do Not Release to NTIS 20 | | [y~| Order From Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C. 15. Price 20402. QOrder From National Technical Information Service (NTIS), Springfield, VA. 22161 USCOMM-DC 6043-P80X tX>J 1 Technical Publications Periodical — Journal of Research ofthe National Institute of Standards and Technology Reports NIST research and development in those disciplines ofthe physical and engineering sciences in which the Institute is active. These include physics, chemistry, engineering, mathematics, and computer sciences. Papers cover a broad range ofsubjects, with major emphasis on measurement methodology and the basic technology underlying standardization. Also included from time to time are survey articles on topics closely related to the Institute's technical and scientific programs. Issued six times a year. Nonperiodicals — Monographs Major contributions to the technical literature on various subjects related to the Institute's scientific and technical activities. — Handbooks Recommended codes ofengineering and industrial practice (including safety codes) de- veloped in cooperation with interested industries, professional organizations, and regulatory bodies. — Special Publications Include proceedings ofconferences sponsored by NIST, NIST annual reports, and other special publications appropriate to this grouping such as wall charts, pocket cards, and bibliographies. — Applied Mathematics Series Mathematical tables, manuals, and studies ofspecial interest to physi- cists, engineers, chemists, biologists, mathematicians, computer programmers, and others engaged in scientific and technical work. — National Standard Reference Data Series Provides quantitative data on the physical and chemical properties ofmaterials, compiled from the world's literature and critically evaluated. Developed un- der a worldwide program coordinated by NIST under the authority ofthe National Standard Data Act (Public Law 90-396). NOTE: The Journal of Physical and Chemical Reference Data (JPCRD) is published quarterly for NIST by the American Chemical Society (ACS) and the American Insti- tute of Physics (AIP). Subscriptions, reprints, and supplements are available from ACS, 1155 Six- teenth St., NW., Washington, DC 20056. — Building Science Series Disseminates technical information developed at the Institute on building materials, components, systems, and whole structures. The series presents research results, test methods, and performance criteria related to the structural and environmental functions and the durability and safety characteristics ofbuilding elements and systems. — Technical Notes Studies or reports which are complete in themselves but restrictive in their treat- ment ofa subject. Analogous to monographs but not so comprehensive in scope or definitive in treatment ofthe subject area. Often serve as a vehicle for final reports of work performed at NIST under the sponsorship ofother government agencies. — Voluntary Product Standards Developed under procedures published by the Department of Com- merce in Part 10, Title 15, ofthe Code of Federal Regulations. The standards establish nationally recognized requirements for products, and provide all concerned interests with a basis for common understanding ofthe characteristics ofthe products. NIST administers this program as a supplement to the activities ofthe private sector standardizing organizations. — Consumer Information Series Practical information, based on NIST research and experience, cov- ering areas ofinterest to the consumer. Easily understandable language and illustrations provide use- ful background knowledge for shopping in today's technological marketplace. Order the above NISTpublicationsfrom: Superintendent ofDocuments, Government Printing Office, DC Washington, 20402. Order the following NISTpublications—FIPS and NISTIRs—from the National TechnicalInformation Service, Springfield, VA 22161. Federal Information Processing Standards Publications (FIPS PUB)— Publications in this series col- lectively constitute the Federal Information Processing Standards Register. The Register serves as the official source ofinformation in the Federal Government regarding standards issued by NIST pursuant to the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949 as amended, Public Law 89-306 (79 Stat. 1127), and as implemented by Executive Order 11717 (38 FR 12315, dated May 11, 1973) and Part 6 ofTitle 15 CFR (Code of Federal Regulations). NIST Interagency Reports (NISTIR)—A special series ofinterim or final reports on work performed by NIST for outside sponsors (both government and non-government). In general, initial distribu- tion is handled by the sponsor; public distribution is by the National Technical Information Service, VA Springfield, 22161, in paper copy or microfiche form.U.S. Department of Commerce National Institute of Standards andTechnology (formerly National Bureau of Standards) Gaithersburg, MD 20899 Official Business Penaltyfor Private Use$300