NIST Special Publication NIST SP 800-221A Information and Communications Technology (ICT) Risk Outcomes Integrating ICT Risk Management Programs with the Enterprise Risk Portfolio Stephen Quinn Nahla Ivy Julie Chua Karen Scarfone Matthew Barrett Larry Feldman Daniel Topper Greg Witte R. K. Gardner This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-221ANIST Special Publication NIST SP 800-221A Information and Communications Technology (ICT) Risk Outcomes Integrating ICT Risk Management Programs with the Enterprise Risk Portfolio Stephen Quinn Karen Scarfone Applied Cybersecurity Division Scarfone Cybersecurity Information Technology Laboratory Matthew Barrett Nahla Ivy CyberESI Consulting Group, Inc. Enterprise Risk Management Office Office of Financial Resource Management Larry Feldman Julie Chua Daniel Topper Office of Information Security Greg Witte Office of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO) Huntington Ingalls Industries U.S. Department of Health and Human Services R. K. Gardner New World Technology Partners This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-221A November 2023 U.S. Department of Commerce Gina M. Raimondo, Secretary National Institute of Standards and Technology Laurie E. Locascio, NIST Director and Under Secretary of Commerce for Standards and TechnologyNIST SP 800-221A ICT Risk Outcomes November 2023 Certain commercial entities, equipment, or materials may be identified in this document in order to describe an experimental procedure or concept adequately. Such identification is not intended to imply recommendation or endorsement by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), nor is it intended to imply that the entities, materials, or equipment are necessarily the best available for the purpose. There may be references in this publication to other publications currently under development by NIST in accordance with its assigned statutory responsibilities. The information in this publication, including concepts and methodologies, may be used by federal agencies even before the completion of such companion publications. Thus, until each publication is completed, current requirements, guidelines, and procedures, where they exist, remain operative. For planning and transition purposes, federal agencies may wish to closely follow the development of these new publications by NIST. Organizations are encouraged to review all draft publications during public comment periods and provide feedback to NIST. Many NIST cybersecurity publications, other than the ones noted above, are available at https://csrc.nist.gov/publications. Authority This publication has been developed by NIST in accordance with its statutory responsibilities under the Federal Information Security Modernization Act (FISMA) of 2014, 44 U.S.C. § 3551 et seq., Public Law (P.L.) 113-283. NIST is responsible for developing information security standards and guidelines, including minimum requirements for federal information systems, but such standards and guidelines shall not apply to national security systems without the express approval of appropriate federal officials exercising policy authority over such systems. This guideline is consistent with the requirements of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-130. Nothing in this publication should be taken to contradict the standards and guidelines made mandatory and binding on federal agencies by the Secretary of Commerce under statutory authority. Nor should these guidelines be interpreted as altering or superseding the existing authorities of the Secretary of Commerce, Director of the OMB, or any other federal official. This publication may be used by nongovernmental organizations on a voluntary basis and is not subject to copyright in the United States. Attribution would, however, be appreciated by NIST. NIST Technical Series Policies Copyright, Fair Use, and Licensing Statements NIST Technical Series Publication Identifier Syntax Publication History Approved by the NIST Editorial Review Board on 2023-10-18 How to Cite this NIST Technical Series Publication: Quinn S, Ivy N, Chua J, Scarfone K, Barrett M, Feldman L, Topper D, Witte G, Gardner RK (2023) Information and Communications Technology (ICT) Risk Outcomes: Integrating ICT Risk Management Programs with the Enterprise Risk Portfolio. (National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD), NIST Special Publication (SP) NIST SP 800-221A. https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-221ANIST SP 800-221A ICT Risk Outcomes November 2023 Author ORCID iDs Stephen D. Quinn: 0000-0003-1436-684X Nahla Ivy: 0000-0003-4741-422X Karen Scarfone: 0000-0001-6334-9486 Matthew Barrett: 0000-0002-7689-427X Larry Feldman: 0000-0003-3888-027X Daniel Topper: 0000-0003-2612-7547 Gregory A. Witte: 0000-0002-5425-1097 Contact Information ictrm@nist.gov National Institute of Standards and Technology Attn: Applied Cybersecurity Division, Information Technology Laboratory 100 Bureau Drive (Mail Stop 8930) Gaithersburg, MD 20899-8930 All comments are subject to release under the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)NIST SP 800-221A ICT Risk Outcomes November 2023 Abstract The increasing frequency, creativity, and severity of technology attacks means that all enterprises should ensure that information and communications technology (ICT) risk is receiving appropriate attention within their enterprise risk management (ERM) programs. Specific types of ICT risk include, but are not limited to, cybersecurity, privacy, and supply chain. This document provides a framework of outcomes that applies to all types of ICT risk. It complements NIST Special Publication (SP) 800-221, Enterprise Impact of Information and Communications Technology Risk, which focuses on the use of risk registers to communicate and manage ICT risk. Keywords enterprise risk management (ERM); enterprise risk profile (ERP); enterprise risk register (ERR); information and communications technology (ICT); ICT risk; ICT risk management (ICTRM); ICT risk measurement; ICT Risk Outcomes Framework (ICT ROF); risk appetite; risk register; risk tolerance. Reports on Computer Systems Technology The Information Technology Laboratory (ITL) at the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) promotes the U.S. economy and public welfare by providing technical leadership for the Nation’s measurement and standards infrastructure. ITL develops tests, test methods, reference data, proof of concept implementations, and technical analyses to advance the development and productive use of information technology. ITL’s responsibilities include the development of management, administrative, technical, and physical standards and guidelines for the cost-effective security and privacy of other than national security-related information in federal information systems. The Special Publication 800-series reports on ITL’s research, guidelines, and outreach efforts in information system security, and its collaborative activities with industry, government, and academic organizations. Audience The primary audience for this publication includes both Federal Government and non-Federal Government professionals at all levels who understand ICT but may be unfamiliar with the details of ERM. The secondary audience includes both Federal and non-Federal Government corporate officers, high-level executives, ERM officers and staff members, and others who understand ERM but may be unfamiliar with the details of ICT. Acknowledgments The authors wish to thank all individuals, organizations, and enterprises that contributed to the creation of this document. This includes Jim Foti, Amy Mahn, Matt Scholl, Kevin Stine, and Isabel Van Wyk of NIST and Mat Heyman of Impresa Management Solutions. The authors appreciate the support of the United States Department of Health and Human Services and the iNIST SP 800-221A ICT Risk Outcomes November 2023 Federal Cyber-ERM Community of Interest, including the following members who provided specific comments: Cedric Carter Jr., L. Dix, Ken Hong Fong, Kim Isaac, Z. Kaptaine, Nnake Nweke, Khairun Pannah, Katherine Polevitzky, Thom Richison, Nicole Rohloff, C. Rosu, Stephanie Saravia, M. Sawyer, and Angelica Stanley. The authors also thank Joel Crook of Consolidated Nuclear Security, LLC; Justin Perkins of CTIA; Kelly Hood of Optic Cyber Solutions; and Matthew Smith of Seemless Transition, LLC; and individual commenters Simon Burson and Chuck Shriver. Document Conventions For the purposes of this publication, “assets” are defined as technologies that may compose an information or communications system. The term “asset” or “assets” is used in multiple frameworks and documents. Examples include laptop computers, desktop computers, servers, sensors, data, mobile phones, tablets, routers, and switches. In instances where the authors mean “assets” as they appear on a balance sheet, the word “asset” will be preceded by words such as “high-level,” “balance sheet,” or “Level 1” to differentiate context. Patent Disclosure Notice NOTICE: ITL has requested that holders of patent claims whose use may be required for compliance with the guidance or requirements of this publication disclose such patent claims to ITL. However, holders of patents are not obligated to respond to ITL calls for patents and ITL has not undertaken a patent search in order to identify which, if any, patents may apply to this publication. As of the date of publication and following call(s) for the identification of patent claims whose use may be required for compliance with the guidance or requirements of this publication, no such patent claims have been identified to ITL. No representation is made or implied by ITL that licenses are not required to avoid patent infringement in the use of this publication. iiNIST SP 800-221A ICT Risk Outcomes November 2023 Table of Contents Introduction ...................................................................................................................... 1 1.1 Purpose and Scope .................................................................................................... 1 1.2 Publication Contents ................................................................................................... 1 Information and Communications Technology Areas ................................................... 2 ICT Risk Outcomes Framework (ROF) ............................................................................ 3 References ..............................................................................................................................12 Appendix A. List of Symbols, Abbreviations, and Acronyms .......................................13 List of Tables Table 1. Function and Category Unique Identifiers .................................................................... 4 Table 2. ICT Risk Outcomes Framework ................................................................................... 5 List of Figures Fig. 1. ICTRM Process .............................................................................................................. 2 iiiNIST SP 800-221A ICT Risk Outcomes November 2023 Introduction The increasing frequency, creativity, and severity of attacks against technology means that all enterprises should ensure that information and communications technology (ICT) risk is receiving appropriate attention within their enterprise risk management (ERM) programs. Specific types of ICT risk include, but are not limited to, cybersecurity, privacy, supply chain, and artificial intelligence risk. 1.1 Purpose and Scope This document provides a framework of outcomes that applies to all types of ICT risk. It complements NIST Special Publication (SP) 800-221, Enterprise Impact of Information and Communications Technology Risk [SP800221], which focuses on the use of risk registers to communicate and manage ICT risk. Before reading this publication, you should first read NIST SP 800-221 so that you understand the concepts and context for the information contained in the framework of outcomes. NIST has already defined outcome-based frameworks for several types of ICT risk, including the Cybersecurity Framework [CSF], the Privacy Framework [PF], and the Secure Software Development Framework [SSDF]. The outcomes in those frameworks are effectively more specific instances of the outcomes in the more general framework defined in this publication. 1.2 Publication Contents The remainder of this publication is organized into the following major sections: • Section 2 provides an overview of ICT processes as a context for ERM. • Section 3 defines the framework of ICT risk outcomes and explains the significance of each field within the framework. • The References section defines the references cited in this publication. • Appendix A contains acronyms used in the publication. 1NIST SP 800-221A ICT Risk Outcomes November 2023 Information and Communications Technology Areas ERM is the highest terminus of ICT risk management (ICTRM). As with NIST SP 800-221, the processes described within this publication focus on ICTRM within, between, and across ICT areas. ICTRM helps ensure that leaders and stakeholders are supported by a holistic risk risk monitoring and communication model, which is needed for the complexity of risks at the enterprise level. An ICT Risk Outcomes Framework (ROF) is needed to support ICT risk escalation and elevation, as well as reduce ICTRM complexity. While the focus of many risk management program frameworks is the comprehensiveness of each program’s controls, the ICT ROF focuses on the comprehensiveness of overarching risk governance and management. Specifically, the ICT ROF enumerates distinct outcomes associated with the ICTRM process described in NIST SP 800-221 and illustrated in Fig. 1. The risk governance outcomes of the ICT ROF are meant to be applied at select levels in a given organization. Typically, risk governance will occur at the enterprise level, and may also occur at the organization level. The risk management outcomes of the ICT ROF may be applied at all levels in a given organization. The risk management outcomes are highly relevant to individual risk management programs and may be used alongside risk management program frameworks. Fig. 1. ICTRM Process 2NIST SP 800-221A ICT Risk Outcomes November 2023 ICT Risk Outcomes Framework (ROF) This section defines the ICT ROF, a framework for integrating ICT risk with enterprise risk. The ICT ROF is a set of desired outcomes and applicable references that are common across all types of ICT risk. It provides a common language for understanding, managing, and expressing ICT risk to internal and outside stakeholders. It can be used to help identify and prioritize actions for reducing ICT risk, and it is a tool for aligning policy, business, and technological approaches to managing that risk. Using the framework for each type of ICT risk will help organizations improve the quality and consistency of ICT risk information they provide as inputs to their ERM programs. That, in turn, will help organizations address all forms of ICT risk more effectively in their ERM. The ICT ROF is comprised of the following components: • Functions organize ICT risk outcomes at their highest level. There are two Functions: Govern (GV): Develop and implement the organizational business logic for risk o management, and ensure risk management is performed according to that business logic. Manage (MA): Continuously identify and address risks in accordance with the o organization’s risk management policies, processes, and priorities. • Categories are the subdivisions of a Function into groups of ICT risk outcomes closely tied to programmatic needs and particular activities. Examples of Categories include: Roles and Responsibilities (GV.RR) o Risk Analysis (MA.RA) o Risk Monitoring, Evaluation, and Adjustment (MA.RM) o • Subcategories further divide a Category into specific outcomes of technical and/or management activities. While not exhaustive, they help support achievement of the outcomes in each Category. Examples of Subcategories include: GV.RR-1: Risk governance roles and responsibilities are established and o communicated. MA.RA-1: The likelihood of each risk event is estimated using risk assessment o techniques and probability models. MA.RM-4: When risk exceeds risk tolerance, changes to risk responses are o identified and planned. • Implementation Examples are one or more notional examples of how tools, processes, or other methods could be used to help achieve a Subcategory. No examples or combination of examples are required, and the stated examples are not the only feasible options. Some examples may not be applicable to certain organizations and situations. Examples of Implementation Examples include: For GV.RR-1: An organization establishes which roles are responsible for o documenting risk appetite and policy, as well as performing risk oversight. 3NIST SP 800-221A ICT Risk Outcomes November 2023 For MA.RA-1: Bayesian models, event tree analysis, or similar techniques are o used to determine the likelihood of a risk, and that information is recorded in the Current Assessment – Likelihood field in a risk register. For MA.RM-4: KRIs are monitored to determine when risk exceeds risk o tolerance, resulting in updates to the risk register and planning of a revised risk response, risk response type, risk response cost, and/or risk response description. • Informative References are specific sections of standards, guidelines, and practices that illustrate methods to achieve the outcomes associated with each Subcategory. The Informative References are intended to be illustrative and not exhaustive. To avoid having to re-release this publication every time an Informative Reference is added or updated, Informative References are omitted from this publication. Instead, they will be held in NIST’s Online Informative References (OLIR) Catalog. For ease of use, each Function, Category, and Subcategory is assigned a unique identifier. Table 1 lists the identifiers for the Functions and Categories to show the framework’s overall structure. Table 1. Function and Category Unique Identifiers Function Category GOVERN (GV) Context (GV.CT) Roles and Responsibilities (GV.RR) Policy (GV.PO) Benchmarking (GV.BE) Communication (GV.CO) Adjustments (GV.AD) Oversight (GV.OV) MANAGE (MA) Risk Identification (MA.RI) Risk Analysis (MA.RA) Risk Prioritization (MA.RP) Risk Response (MA.RR) Risk Monitoring, Evaluation, and Adjustment (MA.RM) Risk Communication (MA.RC) Risk Improvement (MA.IM) Table 2 defines the Functions, Categories, Subcategories, and Implementation Examples in the ICT ROF and is available for browsing and download at the Cybersecurity and Privacy Tool (CPRT) page. Table 2 includes only a subset of what an organization may need to do and achieve. The information in the table is space-constrained; much more information can be found from the Informative References in the NIST OLIR Catalog. Note that the order of the Functions, Categories, and Subcategories in the table is not intended to imply the sequence of implementation or the relative importance of any Function, Category, or Subcategory. Please note that Implementation Examples are offered to provide clarification of the Subcategory. The information in the Implementation Example field represents a way in which the Subcategory might be satisfied but is not exhaustive of all possible ways. 4NIST SP 800-221A ICT Risk Outcomes November 2023 Table 2. ICT Risk Outcomes Framework Function Category Subcategory Implementation Example GOVERN (GV): Context (GV.CT): The GV.CT-1: Organizational mission, vision, An organization builds upon statute and authorities Develop and organization’s risk context, and authorities are understood and thereof to develop its two-year mission and five-year implement the including mission, mission considered. vision statements. organizational priorities, stakeholders, GV.CT-2: Internal and outside stakeholder An organization periodically inventories groups of business logic for objectives, and direction, is groups that affect or are affected by the people that affect, and are affected by, the risk management, understood. organization are identified. organization. and ensure risk GV.CT-3: The priorities, expectations, and An organization understands and considers management is effects of internal and external stakeholder stakeholder expectations such as: performed groups are understood and considered. -Cultural expectations of employees according to that -Achievement expectations of officers and directors business logic. -Privacy expectations of customers -Business expectations of partners -Compliance expectations of regulators -Ethics expectations of society GV.CT-4: Organizational charter, As part of annual strategic planning, an organization expectations, and objectives are aligned, performs a strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and prioritized, and communicated. threats (SWOT) analysis to determine near-term and long-term objectives, risks, and risk appetite. The objectives, risks, and risk appetite are documented and communicated in the form of a strategy. GV.CT-5: Mission/business functions and Risk activities account for mission/business impact in criticality are communicated. the Impact field of the risk register, and account for mission/business criticality in the business impact analysis (BIA). Roles and Responsibilities GV.RR-1: Risk governance roles and An organization establishes which roles are (GV.RR): Positions, duties, responsibilities are established and responsible for documenting risk appetite and policy, and authorities for risk communicated. as well as performing risk oversight. governance and management GV.RR-2: Risk management roles and An organization establishes which roles are are established and responsibilities are established and responsible for extending risk appetite into risk communicated. communicated. tolerance, as well as identifying, prioritizing, responding to, monitoring, evaluating, and adjusting risk. Policy (GV.PO): The policies GV.PO-1: Risk management stances, An organization authors and disseminates a risk to manage and monitor the activities, appetites, roles, and authorities management policy that declares stances (what the organization’s regulatory, are established and communicated. organization will, and will not, do), activities related legal, risk, environmental, and to those stances, risk limitations using risk appetite 5NIST SP 800-221A ICT Risk Outcomes November 2023 Function Category Subcategory Implementation Example operational requirements are statements, and expectations and authorities understood. associated with key roles such as the Chief Executive Officer, Chief Financial Officer, Chief Risk Officer, and Chief Information Security Officer. GV.PO-2: Organizational stances, An organization considers risk policies and risk activities, roles, and authorities that affect, appetite statements when developing policies that and are affected by, risk management are affect/support risk management. aligned with risk policies and appetite. When developing policies that are affected by risk management, an organization aligns those policies with risk policies and risk appetite statements. Benchmarking (GV.BE): GV.BE-1: High-level organizational risks Annually, an organization uses enterprise risk Methods, criteria, and are periodically catalogued, categorized, scenarios as a basis for adjusting the high-level risks expectations for discovering and communicated. represented in a risk breakdown structure. and distinguishing risk are GV.BE-2: Risk appetite statements are As a part of annual strategic planning, a corporation established, communicated, developed and periodically communicated determines its risk appetite and communicates its risk and followed. to risk management programs. appetite statements to risk management programs via a strategic plan. GV.BE-3: Risk tolerance statements are An organization translates risk appetite statements created as more specific translations of risk into more specific, measurable, and broadly appetite statements and communicated to understandable risk tolerance statements in risk management programs as a basis for preparation to distribute the labor of risk management identifying risk. across a team of personnel. GV.BE-4: Risk scenarios that describe Annually, an organization creates and refines assets, threats, vulnerabilities, probabilities, anticipated enterprise risk scenarios as a basis for and impacts are crafted and communicated. adjusting the high-level risks represented in a risk breakdown structure. Communication (GV.CO): GV.CO-1: Mandatory and voluntary Information from the enterprise risk register (ERR) Methods, criteria, and disclosure decisions are informed through forms the basis for a quarterly enterprise risk profile schedules for expressing and an enterprise risk profile and performed on (ERP) update and informs quarterly and annual public explaining risk are established, a scheduled or as-needed (e.g., incident disclosures. communicated, and followed. disclosure) basis. A data breach involving protected health information (PHI) triggers mandatory reporting to PHI owners and regulators. GV.CO-2: An enterprise risk An ERR and standardized values and instructions for communication format is established, ERR fields are created, occasionally updated, and communicated, and used as the basis for communicated to risk management programs as the communication with risk management expected risk reporting format. programs. 6NIST SP 800-221A ICT Risk Outcomes November 2023 Function Category Subcategory Implementation Example GV.CO-3: Criteria for immediate and An ERM committee documents and communicates periodic escalation and elevation of criteria to the risk management programs for program risks are established, periodically and immediately: communicated, understood, and used as the - communicating risk status of the next Level (i.e., basis for risk communication. escalation) and - transferring risk ownership to the next Level (i.e., elevation). Adjustments (GV.AD): Risk GV.AD-1: Risk appetite is adjusted based An organization’s annual strategic planning refines governance is adapted based on on changes in organizational objectives, organizational objectives and risk appetite based on changes in organizational risk exposure, and residual risk. known risk exposure and residual risk. objectives, risk exposure, and GV.AD-2: Strategic opportunities (aka Among other things, risk exposure and residual risk residual risk. positive risks) are adjusted based on from the risk register are considered in trade-off changes in organizational objectives, risk analysis with opportunities, and adjustments may be exposure, and residual risk. made to opportunity scope. GV.AD-3: Strategic priorities are adjusted Among other things, risk exposure and residual risk based on changes in organizational from the risk register are considered in trade-off objectives, risk exposure, and residual risk. analysis with opportunities, and adjustments may be made to opportunity (i.e., positive risk) priority, timeline, or budget. Oversight (GV.OV): Risk is GV.OV-1: Risk appetite statements and Portfolio-level personnel verify that risk management identified and addressed by risk related contextual information are programs understand and are applying risk appetite management programs understood and applied by risk management statements appropriately by evaluating what risks are according to the criteria and programs. communicated in the risk register. expectations of risk GV.OV-2: Assigned roles, responsibilities, Portfolio-level personnel verify that risk management governance. and authorities are understood and programs understand and are implementing roles, implemented by risk management responsibilities, and authorities appropriately by programs. evaluating that assigned responsibilities are being fulfilled and by whom. GV.OV-3: Organizational risk Portfolio-level personnel monitor stances to verify management policy and policies affecting that risk policies and risk-affecting policies are risk management are understood and upheld. implemented by risk management programs. GV.OV-4: Risk tolerance statements are Portfolio-level personnel verify that risk management used by risk management program programs understand and are applying risk tolerance personnel as a basis for identifying risk. statements appropriately by evaluating what risks are communicated in the risk register. 7NIST SP 800-221A ICT Risk Outcomes November 2023 Function Category Subcategory Implementation Example GV.OV-5: Risk is identified, adjudicated, A risk management program uses the ERR as a basis and tracked by risk management programs for its risk register, and regularly communicates with according to published formats. Level 2 and Level 1 risk personnel using that program risk register. GV.OV-6: Risk is communicated and A risk management program uses criteria provided by transferred by risk management programs Level 2 risk personnel to escalate risks to the according to published escalation and attention of Level 2 risk personnel and elevate risks elevation criteria and process. for management by Level 2 risk personnel. GV.OV-7: Risk management programs A risk management program provides feedback to provide feedback for adjustment of risk Level 2 and Level 1 risk managers when more risks appetite, opportunities, and strategic exceed tolerance than current budgets will support. priorities. MANAGE (MA): Risk Identification (MA.RI): MA.RI-1: The assets (data, personnel, The dependency between facility security and the Continuously Risk events for the devices, systems, facilities, third-party electronic badge reader technology system is identify and address organization are catalogued and services, etc.) that enable the organization identified in a BIA, and any cyber risk to the risks in accordance recorded. to achieve its objectives are identified along electronic badge reader system is recorded in the Risk with the with the assets’ relative importance to those Description field of a risk register as something that organization’s risk objectives and the organization’s strategy. could adversely affect building security. management MA.RI-2: Threats against the Threat intelligence sources are monitored for threats policies, processes, organization’s assets are identified and that may adversely affect critical assets. Threat and priorities. documented. modeling techniques are used to determine likely impact. This information is compared to information available from risk assessments and previous risk events. Relevant threat information is recorded in the Risk Description field of a risk register. MA.RI-3: Vulnerabilities of the Vulnerability sources are monitored for organization’s assets are identified and vulnerabilities that affect critical assets, and relevant documented. vulnerabilities are recorded in the Risk Description field of a risk register. MA.RI-4: Potential consequences are Risk cause and effect are documented as a risk identified for each risk for the scenario and included in the Risk Description field of organization’s assets and documented. a risk register. MA.RI-5: Risks are categorized in The Risk Category field of a risk register is populated anticipation of future grouping and with categories that are meaningful to an combination. organization. Risk Analysis (MA.RA): Risk MA.RA-1: The likelihood of each risk Bayesian models, event tree analysis, or similar events are assessed for event is estimated using risk assessment techniques are used to determine the likelihood of a likelihood and impact. techniques and probability models. risk, and that information is recorded in the Current Assessment – Likelihood field in a risk register. 8NIST SP 800-221A ICT Risk Outcomes November 2023 Function Category Subcategory Implementation Example MA.RA-2: The impact of each risk event is An organization uses prior event data and the three- estimated using risk assessment techniques point estimate to determine likely single-loss that take into consideration both tangible expectancy (SLE) and annualized loss expectancy and less tangible impacts, including (ALE) from a risk and records that information in the secondary/cascading impacts, and the Current Assessment – Impact field in a risk register. estimated impact is recorded. Risk Prioritization (MA.RP): MA.RP-1: The exposure presented by each An organization assigns a qualitative risk exposure Key risks are ranked for risk is determined using qualitative and/or based on risk likelihood and impact and records that response decisions. quantitative models and recorded. determination in the Current Assessment – Exposure Rating field of a risk register. MA.RP-2: The risks are prioritized based An organization uses a quantitative model to on exposure and other factors using prioritize its risks and records the priorities in the qualitative and/or quantitative models, and Priority field of a risk register. the priorities are recorded. Risk Response (MA.RR): MA.RR-1: The exposure associated with An organization uses the exposure from a risk register Risk responses are developed, each risk is checked against risk tolerance to decide an appropriate risk response. costed, decided, described, statements to determine which risk response assigned, and executed. is necessary to achieve information and communications technology objectives. MA.RR-2: A risk response that will An organization chooses a risk response type and achieve business objectives and comply estimates its cost, and records those in the Risk with risk guidance from leadership is Response Type and Risk Response Cost fields, identified, planned, and recorded, along respectively, of a risk register. with the estimated cost of applying the risk response. MA.RR-3: A risk owner is assigned for For each risk response in a risk register, a person is each risk response. assigned responsibility for the risk response action and recorded in the Risk Owner field of the risk register. MA.RR-4: Plans for implementing risk For each risk response in a risk register, a plan is responses are documented. recorded in the Risk Response Description field of the risk register. 9NIST SP 800-221A ICT Risk Outcomes November 2023 Function Category Subcategory Implementation Example MA-RR-5: Risk responses that will take an A federal agency determines that a risk will take two extended period of time or require years to fully address and records the corresponding additional funding to fully enact are risk plan in a Plan of Action & Milestones (POA&M) recorded and tracked. document. A private-sector organization determines that a risk will require funding from next fiscal year to fully address and records the corresponding risk plan in a project plan. MA.RR-6: Risk analysis is revised after An organization updates the Current Assessment – risk responses are determined to reflect the Likelihood, Impact, and Exposure Rating fields of a envisioned reduction of likelihood and risk register after the risk responses have been impact from each risk response. documented. MA.RR-7: Controls are implemented or An organization implements security controls to enact adjusted to perform risk response plans. a risk response, and those actions are recorded in the Risk Response Description field of a risk register. MA.RR-8: Residual risk is forecasted for An organization estimates its residual risk and records each risk after risk responses are decided. it in the Residual Risk field of a risk register. Risk Monitoring, Evaluation, MA.RM-1: Risk conditions are continually Risks are measured and benchmarked according to and Adjustment (MA.RM): monitored against risk tolerance to ensure key performance indicators (KPIs) and key risk Risks are checked and conditions remain within acceptable levels. indicators (KRIs), respectively. assessed, and risk responses are MA.RM-2: The effectiveness of risk An organization compares target risks (Target Profile) adapted as needed. responses is evaluated against objectives to to current risks (Current Profile) and performs a gap identify risk that exceeds acceptable levels. analysis. MA.RM-3: Findings from audits and risk A risk management program adjusts some risk assessments are analyzed to identify responses based on recent audit findings. changes in risk and the effectiveness of risk responses. MA.RM-4: When risk exceeds risk KRIs are monitored to determine when risk exceeds tolerance, changes to risk responses are risk tolerance, resulting in updates to the risk register identified and planned. and planning of a revised risk response, risk response type, risk response cost, and/or risk response description. MA.RM-5: Risk tolerance statements and A risk management program makes budgetary budgets are adjusted as needed to reflect adjustments when it identifies risks that are beyond appropriate risk responses. tolerance and cannot be addressed with current budgets. MA.RM-6: Risk response plans are Risk response descriptions are updated in risk updated as needed to include monitoring registers to note KPIs and KRIs that will result in and measurement milestones that can access to management reserve. 10NIST SP 800-221A ICT Risk Outcomes November 2023 Function Category Subcategory Implementation Example trigger the release or repurposing of management reserve resources. MA.RM-7: Controls are adjusted to An organization changes a risk response by implement changes to risk response plans. implementing security controls, and the updated security controls are recorded in the Risk Response Description field of a risk register. MA.RM-8: Changes to risks are identified Changes to risks are identified and recorded in and tracked. appropriate fields of a risk register. Risk Communication MA.RC-1: Details regarding the Details about risk assessment and risk response are (MA.RC): Information on considerations, assumptions, and results of recorded as supplements to a risk register known as risks is recorded and risk management activity are documented. risk assessment reports and risk detail records, disseminated. respectively. MA.RC-2: Risks that match escalation A risk program… criteria are periodically communicated to - communicates risk status of the next Level (i.e., higher-level risk managers, and risks that escalation) or match elevation criteria are transferred to - transfers risk ownership to the next Level (i.e., higher-level risk managers. elevation) …on a periodic or immediate basis using pre-defined criteria supplied by the ERM committee. Risk Improvement (MA.IM): MA.IM-1: Lessons learned while Risk management programs provide quarterly reports Errors in risk management are identifying and addressing risks are to leadership on their lessons learned and on trends reduced through root-cause communicated to leadership. they are seeing. analysis and refinement MA.IM-2: Risk management is refined Risk management programs are updated to take into implementation. based on analysis and feedback of account the results of analyzing implicit risk circumstances involving implicit risk acceptance. acceptance. 11NIST SP 800-221A ICT Risk Outcomes November 2023 References [CSF] National Institute of Standards and Technology (2018) Framework for Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity, Version 1.1. (National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD), NIST Cybersecurity White Paper (CSWP) NIST CSWP 6. https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.CSWP.6 [PF] National Institute of Standards and Technology (2020) NIST Privacy Framework: A Tool for Improving Privacy Through Enterprise Risk Management, Version 1.0. (National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD), NIST Cybersecurity White Paper (CSWP) NIST CSWP 10. https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.CSWP.10 [SP800221] Quinn SD, Ivy N, Chua J, Barrett M, Feldman L, Topper D, Witte GA, Gardner RK, Scarfone KA (2023) Enterprise Impact of Information and Communications Technology Risk: Governing and Managing ICT Risk Programs Within an Enterprise Risk Portfolio. (National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD), NIST Special Publication (SP) NIST SP 800-221. https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-221 [SSDF] Souppaya M, Scarfone K, Dodson D (2022) Secure Software Development Framework (SSDF) Version 1.1: Recommendations for Mitigating the Risk of Software Vulnerabilities. (National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD), NIST Special Publication (SP) NIST SP 800-218. https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-218 12NIST SP 800-221A ICT Risk Outcomes November 2023 Appendix A. List of Symbols, Abbreviations, and Acronyms Selected acronyms and abbreviations used in this paper are defined below. BIA Business Impact Analysis ERM Enterprise Risk Management ERP Enterprise Risk Profile ERR Enterprise Risk Register ICT Information and Communications Technology ICTRM Information and Communications Technology Risk Management ICT ROF Information and Communications Technology Risk Outcomes Framework KPI Key Performance Indicator KRI Key Risk Indicator OLIR Online Informative References SP Special Publication 13