2017 ANNUAL REPORT NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM NIST SPECIAL PUBLICATION 800-203THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANKANNUAL REPORT 2017 NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM PATRICK O’REILLY, EDITOR KRISTINA RIGOPOULOS, EDITOR Computer Security Division Applied Cybersecurity Division Information Technology Laboratory Information Technology Laboratory CO-EDITORS: Larry Feldman Greg Witte G2, Inc. Annapolis Junction, Maryland THIS PUBLICATION IS AVAILABLE FREE OF CHARGE FROM https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-203 JULY 2018 U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE Wilbur L. Ross, Jr., Secretary NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS AND TECHNOLOGY Walter Copan, NIST Director and Under Secretary of Commerce for Standards and TechnologyAUTHORITY This publication has been developed by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) in accordance with its statutory responsibilities under the Federal Information Security Modernization Act (FISMA) of 2014, 44 U.S.C. § 3541 et seq., Public Law (P.L.) 113-283. NIST is responsible for developing information security standards and guidelines, including minimum requirements for federal information systems, but such standards and guidelines shall not apply to national security systems without the express approval of appropriate federal ofcials exercising policy authority over such systems. This guideline is consistent with the requirements of the Ofce of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-130. Nothing in this publication should be taken to contradict the standards and guidelines made mandatory and binding on federal agencies by the Secretary of Commerce under statutory authority. Nor should these guidelines be interpreted as altering or superseding the existing authorities of the Secretary of Commerce, Director of the OMB, or any other federal ofcial. This publication may be used by nongovernmental organizations on a voluntary basis and is not subject to copyright in the United States. Attribution would, however, be appreciated by NIST. National Institute of Standards and Technology Special Publication 800-203 Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol. Spec. Publ. 800-203, 175 pages (July 2018) CODEN: NSPUE2 This publication is available free of charge from: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-203 REPORTS ON COMPUTER SYSTEMS TECHNOLOGY The Information Technology Laboratory (ITL) at NIST promotes the U.S. economy and public welfare by providing technical leadership for the Nation’s measurement and standards infrastructure. ITL develops tests, test methods, reference data, proof of concept implementations, and technical analyses to advance the development and productive use of information technology. ITL’s responsibilities include the development of management, administrative, technical, and physical standards and guidelines for the cost-efective security and privacy of other than national security-related information in federal information systems. The Special Publication 800-series reports on ITL’s research, guidelines, and outreach eforts in information system security, and its collaborative activities with industry, government, and academic organizations. I NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The editors, Patrick O’Reilly of the Computer Security Division (CSD) and Kristina Rigopoulos of the Applied Cybersecurity Division (ACD), would like to thank their ITL colleagues who provided write-ups on their project highlights and accomplishments for this annual report (their names are mentioned after each project write-up). The editors would also like to acknowledge Elaine Barker (CSD) a Lisa Carnahan (Standards Coordination Ofce, NIST), for reviewing and providing valuable feedback for this annual report. The editors would also like to acknowledge Natasha Hanacek (Graphic Designer, NIST Public Afairs Ofce) for designing the cover and inside layout for this annual report. DISCLAIMER Any mention of commercial products or organizations is for informational purposes only; it is not intended to imply recommendation or endorsement by the National Institute of Standards and Technology, nor is it intended to imply that the products identifed are necessarily the best available for the purpose. TRADEMARK INFORMATION All names are trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective owners. II ACKNOWLEDGMENTS | FY 2017TABLE OF CONTENTS WELCOME LETTER ..................................................................................................................................................................... 1 ITL INVOLVEMENT WITH INTERNATIONAL IT SECURITY STANDARDS.............................................................................. 13 RISK MANAGEMENT ................................................................................................................................................................... 19 BIOMETRIC STANDARDS AND ASSOCIATED CONFORMITY ASSESSMENT TESTING TOOLS .........................................29 CYBERSECURITY APPLICATIONS ............................................................................................................................................ 30 SOFTWARE ASSURANCE & QUALITY ...................................................................................................................................... 33 FEDERAL CYBERSECURITY RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT (R&D) ................................................................................ 36 COMPUTER FORENSICS ............................................................................................................................................................ 36 CYBERSECURITY AWARENESS, TRAINING, EDUCATION, AND OUTREACH ..................................................................... 38 CRYPTOGRAPHIC STANDARDS PROGRAM ............................................................................................................................ 45 VALIDATION PROGRAMS .......................................................................................................................................................... 61 IDENTITY AND ACCESS MANAGEMENT .................................................................................................................................. 74 RESEARCH IN EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES ............................................................................................................................ 83 NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY CENTER OF EXCELLENCE (NCCoE) ...................................................................................... 96 INTERNET INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION .......................................................................................................................... 99 ADVANCED SECURITY TESTING AND MEASUREMENTS ...................................................................................................... 102 TECHNICAL SECURITY METRICS .............................................................................................................................................. 113 USABILITY AND SECURITY ....................................................................................................................................................... 117 ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM RELATED PUBLICATIONS ................................................................................................. 129 ITL PUBLICATIONS RELEASED DURING FY 2017 ................................................................................................................... 141 APPENDICES ............................................................................................................................................................................... 162 III NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK IV TABLE OF CONTENTS | FY 2017WELCOME LETTER If recent events involving the security of information and operations have taught us anything, it is that cybersecurity, and the way cybersecurity risks are managed, are no longer solely the domain of the information technology specialist. Cybersecurity risk management issues are becoming increasingly familiar topics in executive management ofces and boardrooms. That is as true for businesses as it is for federal and other government organizations. No doubt that is because every year brings more troubling reports of organizations experiencing fnancial and reputational damage from both novel and well-known threats and vulnerabilities. But what does not get nearly as much attention are the impressive advances that so many organizations have been making in thoughtfully and successfully securing their information and processes and the systems upon which those organizations, their leaders, and their customers depend. That’s where the cybersecurity work of the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) comes into play. For nearly 50 years, we have been helping organizations to succeed in building the strategies and in employing the tools needed to better recognize, anticipate, and manage cybersecurity risks. Our diverse cybersecurity activities are an essential ingredient in carrying out the NIST Information Technology Laboratory’s mission: to cultivate trust in information and technology. We do that by conducting foundational and applied cybersecurity research to produce and advance cybersecurity standards, best practices, measurements, and reference resources. While NIST has an explicit statutory mission to focus on federal government agencies, our work can and is being heavily leveraged by large and small businesses, state and local agencies, and other organizations. Ultimately, this benefts taxpayers, investors, consumers, our digital economy, and our national security. However, we don’t work alone. To the contrary, all cybersecurity eforts at NIST are based on input from, and often in cooperation with, the private sector and other government agencies. We also don’t work in the dark. NIST prides itself on being transparent, open, and collaborative. When we actively engage the private and public sectors, we rely on and use experts from around the country – and around the globe – to complement the talents of our own staf. Exposing our thinking to others helps to improve the quality, relevance, and likely use of the end product. This report features some of our most signifcant accomplishments during Fiscal Year (FY) 2017 in risk management, cryptography, identity and access management, vulnerability management, education and workforce development, and internet and communications infrastructure, as well as our eforts to transition our work into common practice. Below are just a few highlights of the work carried out in 2017. • In recent years, there has been a substantial amount of research on quantum computers – machines that exploit quantum mechanical phenomena to solve problems that are difcult or intractable for conventional computers. If large-scale quantum computers are ever built, they will be able to break the existing infrastructure of public-key cryptography. Employing NIST’s proven approach of worldwide open competitions, in 2016 we solicited submissions for quantum-resistant public-key cryptographic algorithms for standards. These algorithms must be secure against both quantum and classical computers and should interoperate with existing communications protocols and networks. We now are engaging the cryptographic community in the difcult work of determining how the 69 submissions we received in 2017 meet the competition’s exacting requirements. • In instances where many devices are interconnected and working in concert to accomplish some task, security and privacy can be very important but hard to achieve due to limited capabilities available 1 to handle modern cryptographic algorithms. This includes automotive systems, sensor networks, NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017healthcare, distributed control systems, the smart grid, and cyber-physical systems and the Internet of Things (IoT). Recognizing this special challenge and in order to gain greater awareness and involvement with the cryptographic community, NIST shared its fndings in this area (known as lightweight cryptography) and presented our plans to address standardization issues for community feedback. • NIST improved two widely used guidelines that provide senior leaders with the information they need to make risk-based decisions afecting critical mission and business functions. We proposed revisions to Security and Privacy Controls for Information Systems and Organizations (Special Publication (SP) 800-53) and Risk Management Framework for Information Systems and Organizations (SP 800-37). The latter provides a closer link between risk management processes and activities at various organizational levels. It demonstrates how the Cybersecurity Framework can be implemented using established Risk Management Framework processes. Both publications will be fnalized in 2018. • Refecting a growing recognition of the link between cybersecurity and privacy risk management, we collaborated with internal and external partners to integrate privacy requirements and considerations into SP 800-53 and SP 800-37 risk management guidelines as well as our latest version of NIST’s Digital Identity Guidelines (SP 800-63-3), which covers digital identity from the initial risk assessment to the deployment of federated identity solutions. These guidelines build the foundation needed to make privacy and security equal, quality attributes in trustworthy systems. We focused on encouraging the adoption of trusted identities through digital identity standards for federal agencies and internationally. • The supply chain that provides the information and operational technology (IT/OT) upon which we all depend has evolved into a complex, globally distributed, dynamic ecosystem enabling the development of highly refned, sophisticated, cost-efective, and reusable solutions. In FY 2017, we published a proposed process model providing a method to identify and prioritize IT/OT systems and components. The approach aims to increase an organization’s ability to make cost-efective risk decisions by determining the systems and components that have the greatest impact on the organization and that would potentially cause the most harm if compromised. • As NIST continues to collaborate with stakeholders to raise awareness and encourage the use of the voluntary Cybersecurity Framework, we solicited public comments on a draft update of the frst (2014) version and hosted a widely attended workshop that charted progress and shared issues to which NIST now has given additional attention. In May 2017, the President’s Executive Order 13800 directed federal agency heads to use the Cybersecurity Framework to manage cybersecurity risk. In response, NIST released draft guidance on how the Risk Management Framework and Cybersecurity Framework can work together to help agencies develop, implement, and continuously improve their information security programs. After incorporating public comments, NIST released the Baldrige Cybersecurity Excellence Builder, a self-assessment tool based in part on the Cybersecurity Framework, to help organizations better understand the efectiveness of their cybersecurity risk management eforts. • In FY 2017, NIST’s National Cybersecurity Center of Excellence (NCCoE) began taking full advantage of its expanded, more capable facilities to accelerate the adoption of standards-based, security technologies. Healthcare and fnancial services were two areas that had notable progress, including the development of new draft practice guides on securing wireless infusion pumps and on managing access rights for the fnancial sector. NCCoE also leveraged industry partners’ expertise to produce a guide on how organizations can develop strategies to recover operating systems, user fles, applications, and other IT assets from data corruption events such as ransomware. The guide also ofers insights on auditing, reporting, and investigations following a company’s discovery of such destructive security incidents. Other guides addressed the authentication of mobile device users with personal identity verifcation credentials and how organizations can use attribute-based access controls to better manage employee access to data and networks. 2 WELCOME LETTER | FY 2017• The NIST-led National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE) made noteworthy strides in FY 2017 to foster, energize, and promote a robust network and an integrated ecosystem of cybersecurity education, training, and workforce development. We published the NICE Cybersecurity Workforce Framework, establishing a taxonomy and common lexicon to describe all cybersecurity work and workers, irrespective of where or for whom the work is performed. NICE launched “CyberSeek,”an online tool that provides a visualization of the demand for and the supply of cybersecurity workers across the country as well as career pathways in cybersecurity. Via NICE, NIST served as the Commerce Department’s lead, working with the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) to analyze U.S. cybersecurity workforce issues and ofer recommendations in response to the President’s May 2017 Executive Order. Looking ahead - with full knowledge that new challenges are constantly emerging - we are moving towards collaborating with industry, government agencies, and others who use NIST’s cybersecurity research, standards, and guides. For example, in FY 2018 NIST is assigning higher priority to the cybersecurity and privacy aspects of the Internet of Things (IoT). Researchers in our Cybersecurity for IoT program are working with industry to produce guidance and best practices, as well as to perform research and coordinate standards within and across sectors in the digital economy. We are reviewing international standards-based approaches to the IoT challenges and ramping up our IoT-related identity work. NIST is also launching a project to provide organizations with practical guidance to reduce the vulnerability of IoT devices to botnets and other automated distributed threats, while also limiting the utility of compromised devices to malicious actors. Such eforts are paving the way toward more secure IoT devices in the future. In addition to the work in IoT, NIST has embarked on a project to automate much of the testing required under the cryptographic validation programs. We expect that automated cryptographic algorithm testing will be complete in 2018, and we will then begin developing methods to automate the testing of cryptographic modules. These eforts in automation are intended to provide a higher trust in the assurance claims made by the product developers, but do so in an efcient, and cost-efective manner that allows the vendors’ conformance eforts to keep pace with the changing IT landscape. By investing in a more robust testing infrastructure, NIST hopes that product vendors will take advantage of this service by validating their products more often, which will produce more secure products. In reporting on our accomplishments, NIST welcomes all suggestions about how we can improve our work. We do this so that we can provide the nation with the kind of cybersecurity information and tools needed to cultivate trust in information and technology while advancing and protecting our economy and our nation. All projects in this report include contact information for the key NIST contacts. Let us hear from you. Donna F. Dodson, NIST Chief Cybersecurity Advisor 3 NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017BACKGROUND INFORMATION OF ANNUAL REPORT This Annual Report provides the opportunity to describe the many cybersecurity program highlights and accomplishments from throughout the NIST Information Technology Laboratory (ITL). The report is organized into several sections, each section is identifed by a title page. Please note: This Annual Report covers the Federal Government’s Fiscal Year (FY) 2017, from October 1, 2016 to September 30, 2017. ITL, an operating unit under NIST, contains seven divisions. Cybersecurity work is conducted by each, and is the sole focus of the Applied Cybersecurity and Computer Security Divisions. Throughout this Annual Report, there are references to particular division activities, and often to work by groups within those divisions. Primarily, the authors of each segment of the report have attributed accomplishments to ITL, since the ITL staf have been involved with each cybersecurity program included in this Annual Report. At the end of each program/project write-up, one or more points of contact are provided and may be used to address questions or requests for more information. Many sections also include additional references that readers may fnd valuable. Below is a condensed hierarchical chart of ITL’s structure: INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY LABORATORY (ITL) OFFICE Charles Romine, Director Jim St. Pierre, Deputy Director Applied Cybersecurity Division (ACD) Kevin Stine,Division Chief Computer Security Division (CSD) Matthew Scholl, Division Chief Applied and Computational Mathematics Division (ACMD) Ronald F Boisvert, Division Chief Advanced Network Technologies Division (ANTD) Abdella Battou, Division Chief Information Access Division (IAD) Shahram Orandi, Division Chief Software and Systems Division (SSD) Ram Sriram, Division Chief ITL’s Cybersecurity Program is pleased to share these achievements and accomplishments made during the 2017 Fiscal Year in this Annual Report. 4 INTRODUCTION | FY 2017THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY LABORATORY IMPLEMENTS THE FEDERAL INFORMATION SECURITY MANAGEMENT ACT This section contains a list of the major activities that were accomplished during FY 2017 by the ITL Cybersecurity Program. Detailed explanations of these activities are provided in the next section. 5 NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY security, the National Checklist Program, digital identity guidelines, block cipher modes LABORATORY (ITL) of operation, the Cipher-Based Message CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM Authentication Code (CMAC) - a Mode for Authentication, an introduction to information IMPLEMENTS FEDERAL security, a report of the workshop on software INFORMATION SECURITY measures and metrics to reduce security vulnerabilities, platform frmware resiliency, MANAGEMENT ACT fog computing, de-identifying government datasets, Long Term Evolution (LTE) security, trustworthy email, security recommendations The E-Government Act, Public Law 107-347, for hypervisor deployment, the Triple Data passed by the 107th Congress and signed into law Encryption Algorithm (TDEA) Block Cipher, by the President in December 2002, recognized the key-derivation methods in key-establishment importance of information security to the economic schemes, pair-wise key-establishment and national security interests of the United States. schemes using discrete logarithm Title III of the E-Government Act, titled the Federal cryptography, security and privacy controls, a Information Security Management Act (FISMA) of risk management framework for information 2002, included the duties and responsibilities for systems and organizations, personal identity the National Institute of Standards and Technology, verifcation (PIV) credentials, access rights Information Technology Laboratory (ITL). There management for the fnancial services sector, are multiple divisions within ITL that are involved securing wireless infusion pumps in healthcare with cybersecurity programs and projects. The delivery organizations, situational awareness work is being conducted collaboratively between for electric utilities, and domain name systems- the divisions. In December 2014, the 113th Congress based electronic mail security. updated FISMA as the Federal Information Security • Fifteen NIST Interagency/Internal Reports Modernization Act (Public Law 113-283). NIST ITL (NISTIR) (10 approved as fnal and 5 drafts) responsibilities were unchanged in the update. In FY were issued on a variety of topics, including: 2017, the ITL Cybersecurity Program addressed its A criticality analysis process model, assignment through the following major activities: security assurance challenges for container • Forty-one NIST Special Publications (SP) (20 deployment, the cybersecurity framework for approved as fnal and 21 drafts) were issued, federal agencies, a cybersecurity framework providing management, operational, and manufacturing profle, dramatically reducing technical security guidelines in a variety of software vulnerabilities, code complexity topic areas, including: on software analysis, identifying uniformity The 2016 Annual Report, the National with entropy and divergence, enhancing Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE) resilience of the Internet and communications Cybersecurity Workforce Framework, ecosystem, mobile application vetting services attribute-based access control and access for public safety, lightweight cryptography, control standards and policies, application privacy engineering and risk management container security, Secure Hash Algorithm-3 in federal systems, automation support for (SHA-3) derived functions, cybersecurity security control assessments, and small event recovery, data integrity, recovering business information security. from ransomware and other destructive • Formally Launched a Post-Quantum events, securing Apple OS X 10.10 systems, Cryptography (PQC) Standardization protecting controlled unclassifed information Process: in nonfederal information systems and The research community has actively organizations, systems security engineering, responded to the NIST Call for Proposals to 6 cyber threat information sharing, bluetooth ITL IMPLEMENTS THE FISMA ACTIvITIES | FY 2017solicit, evaluate, and standardize quantum- operations and assets of organizations and the resistant public key cryptography (also known personal privacy of individuals. Additionally, as post-quantum cryptography (PQC)) this update promotes the integration with algorithms. Upon the submission deadline, diferent risk management and cybersecurity NIST received 82 submissions from 26 approaches and lexicons, including the countries and 6 continents, among which 69 Cybersecurity Framework. The Initial Public submissions are considered as complete and Comment period resulted in over 3000 proper. The NIST Post-Quantum Cryptography comments from over 115 diferent stakeholders team has worked closely with the submitters representing the public and private sectors, and the research community to evaluate and and academia. analyze the frst-round candidates. • Published a Discussion Draft of SP 800-37, • Lightweight Cryptography Standards for the Revision 2: Internet of Things (IoT): This update to NIST SP 800-37 Revision 2, The Internet of Things (IoT) tethers Risk Management Framework for Information heterogeneous “things” together. Some of the Systems and Organizations: A System Life “things” are resource constrained. Lightweight Cycle Approach for Security and Privacy, cryptography provides critical tools for IoT responds to the call by the Defense Science security. To better understand the need for Board, the President’s Executive Order on dedicated lightweight cryptography, the Strengthening the Cybersecurity of Federal NIST team released a white paper in 2017 to Networks and Critical Infrastructure, and specify two major portfolios for lightweight the Ofce of Management and Budget cryptography primitives. NIST will announce a Memorandum M-17-25, to develop the next- call for proposals on lightweight cryptography generation Risk Management Framework primitives in 2018. (RMF) for systems and organizations. This update provides linkage and communication • A NIST / Industry joint working group between the risk management processes and continued the development of automated activities at the executive and operational cryptographic implementation testing: levels of the organization; demonstrates After working with industry on the protocol how the Cybersecurity Framework can be necessary to exchange cryptographic implemented using the established NIST risk test data in an automated fashion, the management processes (i.e., developing a development of the cryptographic algorithm Federal use case); and integrates privacy testing service to be hosted at NIST is fully concepts into the RMF. This discussion draft under way, with the full implementation was issued to inform a public workshop for expected in FY 2018. (See: http://csrc.nist.gov/ RMF stakeholders and featured discussions on projects/acvt). the risk management methodologies used in various sectors and potential opportunities to • Published an Initial Public Draft of Special improve the RMF. Publication (SP) 800-53, Revision 5: NIST SP 800-53 Revision 5, Security and • The Cyber Supply Chain Risk Management Privacy Controls for Information Systems (C-SCRM) program continued to work and Organizations, is a comprehensive set of with stakeholders to develop and improve safeguarding measures that are applicable to FISMA-related guidance on C-SCRM: all types of computing platforms, including C-SCRM controls were signifcantly modifed traditional IT systems, cloud and mobile in a draft of NIST SP 800-53, Security and systems, industrial/process control systems, Privacy Controls for Information Systems and Internet of Things (IoT) devices. The and Organizations, to better align with safeguarding measures in the update to other guidance. A working group co-chaired 7 this publication include a full integration of by NIST and the Department of Defense security and privacy controls to protect the NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017completed a revision of Committee On incorporated into a proof-of-concept software National Security Systems Directives (CNSSD) tool that is freely available. Number 505, Supply Chain Risk Management, • Final Draft of a NIST Special Publication which assigns responsibilities and establishes providing guidance on how to securely minimum criteria for the development and confgure Apple OS X systems: deployment of supply chain risk management NIST developed this publication to assist capabilities for national security systems. IT professionals in securing Apple OS X Also, NIST collaborated with over 3,000 10.10 desktop and laptop systems within stakeholders through the Software and various environments. It provides detailed Supply Chain Assurance (SSCA) Forum information about the security features of OS and email list service. The efort, initiated in X 10.10 and security confguration guidelines. 2003, is co-led by NIST, the Department of The publication recommends and explains Homeland Security (DHS), the Department tested, secure settings with the objective of Defense (DOD) and the U.S. General of simplifying the administrative burden of Services Administration (GSA) and provides improving the security of OS X 10.10 systems a venue for government, industry, and in three types of environments: Standalone, academic participants from around the world Managed, and Specialized Security-Limited to discuss cyber supply chain risks, efective Functionality. practices and mitigation strategies, tools and technologies, and any gaps related to the • Began the integration of privacy into the people, processes, or technologies involved. Risk Management Framework documents: A July 2016 update to Ofce of Management • The goal of the ITL’s Usable Security and and Budget (OMB) Circular A-130 requires Privacy project team is to provide guidance federal agencies to apply the Risk for policymakers, system engineers and Management Framework to privacy programs security professionals so that they can make - managing privacy risk beyond compliance better decisions that enhance the usability with privacy laws, regulations and policies. of cybersecurity in their organizations: In alignment with this policy, the Privacy The Usable Security and Privacy team Engineering Program in ITL has been working contributed usability chapters to SP 800-63, to integrate privacy into the Risk Management Digital Identity Guidelines, marking the frst Framework documents, providing one unifed time there were dedicated usability chapters security and privacy approach – as seen in in this fagship NIST security publication. In the initial draft of SP 800-53rev5 and the addition, the usability team also completed discussion draft of SP 800-37rev2. a long-term operational phishing evaluation, demonstrating the importance of individual • Introduced concepts for privacy engineering user context in explaining phishing email click and risk management as the foundation decisions. for the integration of privacy into the Risk Management Framework documents: • Method developed for efcient automated The Privacy Engineering Program in ACD testing of systems used in Artifcial published NISTIR 8062, An Introduction to Intelligence (AI) applications: Privacy Engineering and Risk Management in NIST developed a method of automatically Federal Systems. This publication establishes testing and verifying rule-based systems the basis for a common vocabulary to a high degree of assurance. The method to facilitate better understanding and uses a mathematical construct known as communication of privacy risk within federal a covering array to exhaustively test all systems, and the efective implementation components of rules used in many classes of of privacy principles. It introduces two key artifcial intelligence applications, for a large subset of such applications. The method was components to support the application of 8 privacy engineering and risk management: ITL IMPLEMENTS THE FISMA ACTIvITIES | FY 2017privacy engineering objectives and a privacy eforts, and convening a team of subject- risk model. These concepts lay the foundation matter experts to begin drafting guidance on for the integration of privacy into the Risk managing IoT cybersecurity and privacy risks. Management Framework (as seen in the latest • The IoT Program convened cross-sector revisions of SP 800-53 and SP 800-37). stakeholders to inform IoT cybersecurity • Comprehensive Security Guidance for eforts: Virtualized Infrastructures and Contributions The IoT Cybersecurity Program coordinated to Standards Development: outreach to a range of public and private- A set of security recommendations for server sector stakeholders to inform them of NIST’s virtualization were updated in the publication IoT cybersecurity work and collect feedback of SP 800-125A, Security Recommendations to inform future work. This included sessions for Hypervisor Deployment on Servers, by at the Cybersecurity Framework Workshop in including emerging use cases. NIST security 2017, the Industrial Internet Consortium (IIC) guidance for this technology now covers quarterly meeting, and planning a colloquium hardware, hypervisor (the core server with industry, government, and academic virtualization software), virtual network participants. and management modules. The active • The National Initiative for Cybersecurity participation of NIST in the editorial team Excellence (NICE) program provided for the International Organization For numerous communication channels and Standardization/International Electrotechnical maintained a visible high-level presence in Commission (ISO/IEC) 21878, Security supporting its mission to the cybersecurity guidelines for design and implementation workforce and education felds: of virtualized servers, has advanced the The NICE program published three standard from a working draft in October eNewsletters; launched an updated and 2016 to a Draft International Standard refreshed the NICE Website to better meet (DIS) in October 2017. In the area of OS the needs of the NICE Community and virtualization, the potential solutions for visitors; produced 3 new one-page reports security countermeasures outlined in SP and updated the content of three others; 800-190, Application Container Security produced two ITL Science Day posters; Guide, were examined, and security established a LinkedIn presence and hashtag assurance requirements for each solution for Tweets from the @NISTCyber twitter were developed to guide actual security account; developed a NICE Multimedia page; confgurations. These security assurance participated in seven conference exhibit requirements were published in NISTIR 8176, displays; and hosted ten webinar sessions. Security Assurance Requirements for Linux Application Container Deployments, for the • The NICE Program also developed and open source Linux platform where application published two NIST publications to support containers are ubiquitously developed and the Cybersecurity Workforce: deployed. During FY 2017, the NICE Program published NIST Special Publication 800-181, National • Established the NIST Cybersecurity Program Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE) for the Internet of Things (IoT): Cybersecurity Workforce Framework, and ITL created a program for IoT cybersecurity the Draft NIST Interagency Report (NISTIR) that supports the development and 8193, National Initiative for Cybersecurity application of standards, guidelines, and Education (NICE) Framework Work Role related tools to improve IoT cybersecurity. Capability Indicators: Indicators for Performing Program establishment included creating an Work Roles. The national need for a common inventory of NIST-wide eforts related to IoT 9 cybersecurity, coordinating among NIST IoT lexicon to describe and organize the cybersecurity workforce and the requisite NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017knowledge, skills, and abilities (KSAs) led code problems in the Software Assurance to the creation of the NICE Cybersecurity Metrics And Tool Evaluation (SAMATE) Workforce Framework (NICE Framework). program: The NICE Framework defnes the spectrum The SAMATE program has three primary of cybersecurity work as well as tasks and for components: the Software Assurance over 50 common Work Roles. While the Work Reference Dataset (SARD), the Static Analysis Roles have made the NICE Framework easier Tool Exposition (SATE), and the Bugs to associate with specifc positions, they do Framework (BF). Mobile applications and not provide organizations with guidance on test cases used in former Static Analysis Tool how to determine if a cybersecurity worker Expositions were added to SARD. In 2017, the can perform a Work Role. NISTIR 8193 is sixth instance of SATE began. intended to help organizations address this • ITL’s Computer Forensics Team researched challenge by identifying capability indicators ways to improve the methods for securely or recommended education, certifcation, acquiring, storing and analyzing digital training, experiential learning, and continuous evidence quickly and efciently: learning that could signal an increased ability ITL promoted the efcient and efective to perform a given Work Role. use of computer technology to investigate • The NICE program provided strategic crimes. The project team developed tools for outreach and engagement with stakeholders testing computer forensic software, including throughout FY 2017: test criteria and test sets. ITL also maintains The NICE Program increased its outreach the National Software Reference Library eforts to include new academic, industry, (NSRL) – a vast archive of published software and government organizations, including applications that is an important resource for international stakeholders through various both criminal investigators and historians. meetings and collaborative eforts including The NSRL published four releases of the the NICE Working Group and NICE Reference Data Set (RDS) that continues to Interagency Coordinating Council. be the premier software resource. The NSRL was expanded to include mobile apps and to • Seven NIST National Cybersecurity Center include the profles obtained from installing of Excellence (NCCoE) Special Publications and exercising applications. (SP) 1800 Series Practice Guides (one revised draft and six new drafts) were • Ongoing involvement and outreach support issued, providing management, operational, among various programs: and technical security guidelines in topic ITL provided assistance to agencies and areas including: the private sector through many outreach Attribute Based Access Control, Domain programs, including the National Initiative for Name Systems-Based Email Security, Cybersecurity Education (NICE), the Federal Situational Awareness for the Electric Information Systems Security Educators’ Utilities, Securing Wireless Infusion Pumps in Association (FISSEA), and the Federal Healthcare Delivery Organizations, Managing Computer Security Managers’ Forum. Access Rights in the Financial Services • Continued support and involvement of the Sector, Data Integrity: Recovering from Information Security and Privacy Advisory Ransomware and Other Destructive Events, Board (ISPAB): and Derived Personal Identity Verifcation NIST solicited recommendations from the (PIV) Credentials. Information Security and Privacy Advisory • The ITL Software Assurance and Quality Board (ISPAB) on draft standards and Program researched and improved how to guidelines regarding information security and assess a tool’s ability to detect and identify privacy issues. 10 ITL IMPLEMENTS THE FISMA ACTIvITIES | FY 2017• In support of FISMA activities, ITL conducted workshops, awareness briefngs, webinars, and various outreach to ITL customers: The ITL Cybersecurity Program hosted or provided at least 55 diferent cybersecurity events throughout FY 2017. These outreach activities were open to the public or for federal agencies. These events covered various Cybersecurity topics – to see the complete list of these events, please see Appendix B at the back of this Annual Report for further details. If a website URL is available for these events – the URLs have been provided. • Annual Reports: The ITL Fiscal Year 2017 Cybersecurity Program Annual Report (formerly titled Computer Security Division Annual Report) was produced and released as a NIST SP. This report, and previously released CSD annual reports from fscal years 2003 through 2017, are available on the Computer Security Resource Center (CSRC) website at https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/ search?topics-lg=3363%7Cannual+reports 11 NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS The next section describes accomplishments that were achieved during FY 2017 (covering the time frame October 1, 2016 to September 30, 2017) for the NIST ITL Cybersecurity Program. (Editors’ Note: Acronyms used throughout this Annual Report are generally defned when frst used. A complete list of Acronyms used in this report is provided in Appendix A of this Annual Report.) 12 ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017ITL INVOLVEMENT WITH (BT-SEG); the International Telecommunications Union - Telecommunication Standardization Sector INTERNATIONAL IT SECURITY (ITU-T); various groups within the Institute of Electrical STANDARDS and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) and the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF); the North American Security Products Organization (NASPO); the Trusted ITL Involvement with National and Computing Group (TCG); and Accredited Standards Committee X9, Inc. (ASC X9, Inc.) (e.g., X9F – Data International IT Security Standards & Information Security Subcommittee). Many of ITL’s Work publications have been the basis for both national and international standards projects. Figure 1 shows many of the national and international standards-developing organizations (SDOs) involved in cybersecurity standardization. Focus on ISO and ANSI Standardization (ISO/ Various ITL staf participate in many cybersecurity IEC JTC1 SC27 IT Security) standards’ activities either in leadership positions The following paragraphs discuss ITL staf activities or as editors and contributors, including the in conjunction with the InterNational Committee for American National Standards Institute (ANSI); the Information Technology Standards (INCITS) Technical International Organization for Standardization (ISO); Committee Cybersecurity 1 (CS1), where ITL’s Mr. Sal the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC); Francomacaro serves as the CS1 Vice Chair. CS1 is the the Biometric Application Programming Interface U.S. counterpart for the ISO/IEC SC27 committee for (BioAPI) Consortium; the Bluetooth Special Interest IT Security. Group (SIG); the Bluetooth Security Expert Group ISO IEC PSDO INTERNATIONAL SG 9 ISO TC68 1S0/IEC JTC l 8onlr.mQS, fc1,1r,nes lnformanon TechnoJoov end Other F1r-cmN1I Se.-,,,r:.es SC 2 Sccurty SC6 SC7 SC17 SC 22 SC7 SC17 SC22 m•n•ae~e"lt •nd ret.comrn& info scfr_y..are& cards & p,morio~ Progror,,mtno SOjttNar,& cc ..d. s & p,mono Progromm,ng eeneral barki"1£ f!XChCJfl;Jf! .J~f'm.J idf!ntif,ronon langucr,f".t system~ idf!r. t,ftcarmn 'onauagf!5 operanons cng,necr.'nt;; en~1ncenng U.S. COUNTERPARTS ANSI (U.5metYJbef-·l50} IEEES A Department of State (US Member --ITU) US TAG Report Path X9 INCITS usT AG Report Path IEEE (US TAG-ISO TC 681 (US TAG- 150/JECJ TC 11 JTC 1/SC 7 TAG Source: /Tl Standards US TAG Report Path US TAG Report Path liaison August 2017 X9F Doto & 1nformooon {US TAGSt ."C TC:u 6ri BJy /S C 21 810 CSl DAPS38 Ml Pl22 n DLT ID Cards& Cyb~,. Secur,t)' DI\PS Biometrics Programming ODP Blod:ch•in Rt!10tf!d Da,ic.f!S /USTAG-JTC /USTAG-ITC /US TAG-ITC lancu.tre1o /USTAG-ITC (US TAC, /US TAG JTC 1/SC 27/ l/5C 38} 1/SC 37) (USTAG ITC 1/SC6/ TC307) 1/SC 17/ 1/SC 22) - KEY PSDO = Partn~r Standards PAS- Publicly Privat.~s ~ctor, national UN ag~ncy;. m~mb~r lnt~rnational standards Deve,opment Organization Available member-based international state-baud internarional developer (e.g., consortium; Specification standards body standards body industry ossociorion} 13 Figure 1: SDOs involved in Cybersecurity NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017IT Security Techniques Standards – the NIST Cybersecurity Framework International Standardizations strategy. ISO/IEC SC27 The main focus for FY 2017 was the development The ITL staf actively participate with JTC1/SC27 of a Technical Specifcation based on ISO/IEC 27101 – and its working groups to develop standards for Guidelines for developing cybersecurity frameworks. the protection of information and communications This Technical Specifcation (TS) represents the work technology (ICT). This includes generic methods, done by a U.S. group on NIST Cybersecurity Framework techniques and guidelines to address both security and should serve as a guideline for other organizations and privacy aspects, such as: considering creating a new cybersecurity framework. • Management of information and ICT The NIST staf was also active in the defnition of security; in particular, information security another ISO Technical Specifcation: Cybersecurity management systems, security processes, and Overview and Concepts. This TS should target any security controls and services; user concerned with cybersecurity, but is particularly targeted toward decision makers. It should cover, • Cryptographic and other security among other things, what cybersecurity IS and IS NOT, mechanisms, including but not limited to, how it applies to existing standards, and how it fts in mechanisms for protecting the accountability, with the other ISO/IEC 27000 series of standards. availability, integrity and confdentiality of information; The NIST staf will increase participation and efort on these activities during FY 2018. • Security management support documentation, including terminology and CONTACT: guidelines as well as procedures for the Mr. Matt Barrett registration of security components; (301) 975-6259 • Security aspects of identity management, matthew.barrett@nist.gov biometrics and privacy; • Conformance assessment, accreditation ISO Standardization of Security and auditing requirements in the area of Requirements for Cryptographic information security management systems; Modules and ITL is also the principal editor, co-editor, and • Security evaluation criteria and methodology. contributor to many ISO/IEC documents by the ISO/ The ITL staf also engages in active liaison and IEC International Organization for Standardization. collaboration with appropriate bodies to ensure ITL’s contributions to the development of these the proper development and application of SC 27 international standards help to create a strong standards and technical reports in relevant areas. foundation for the adoption of and migration from currently used national standards. In particular, this CONTACT: adoption promotes international harmonization for Mr. Salvatore Francomacaro the implementation and testing of cryptographic (301) 975-6414 algorithms and modules, while accommodating salfra@nist.gov individual country preferences in the choice of approved security functions. NIST Cybersecurity Framework – ITL has contributed to the activities of ISO/IEC International Standardization JTC 1 SC/27, which published ISO/IEC 19790, Security Requirements for Cryptographic Modules, on March The NIST/ITL staf actively participate with 1, 2006, and ISO/IEC 24759, Test Requirements 14 JTC1/SC27 and its working groups to support for Cryptographic Modules, on July 1, 2008. ISO/ ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017IEC 19790 specifes the security requirements The revision of ISO/IEC 19790:2012 addresses for a cryptographic module utilized within a new security areas, such as defned software module security system protecting sensitive information in boundaries, degraded modes of operation, trusted computer and telecommunication systems. These channels, two-factor authentication, software security, eforts bring consistent testing of cryptographic mitigation of fault induction and side-channel attacks, modules to the global community by providing operational self-tests for algorithms, and lifecycle ISO-equivalent standards representing Federal assurance from design to end-of-life. Information Processing Standard (FIPS) 140-2, Figure 2 is a chart of the ISO/IEC standards, as Security Requirements for Cryptographic Modules explained above, in which CSD has played a part and Derived Test Requirements [DTR] for FIPS 140-2, during the development process. Security Requirements for Cryptographic Modules. Mr. Randall Easter (CSD) continues as the principal editor In addition to the aforementioned standards, for these standards. International Standards ISO/IEC 17825, Testing methods for the mitigation of non-invasive attack ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 27 Working Group (WG) 3 classes against cryptographic modules, was published completed and published revisions, followed with on January 15, 2016 and ISO/IEC 18367, Cryptographic updated corrections, of ISO/IEC 19790:2006 and algorithms and security mechanisms conformance ISO/IEC 24759:2008. The second revision of ISO/ testing, was published on December 15, 2016. Mr. IEC 19790 was published on August 15, 2012. The Easter was the editor of both standards. second revision of ISO/IEC 24759 was published on January 31, 2014 and the third revision was published International Standard ISO/IEC 17825 specifes March 2017. Both ISO/IEC standards are available the non-invasive attack mitigation test metrics through the American National Standards Institute for determining conformance to the requirements (ANSI) (see: http://webstore.ansi.org/RecordDetail. specifed in ISO/IEC 19790 for Security Levels 3 and aspx?sku=ISO%2FIEC+19790%3A2012). The two 4. The test metrics are associated with the security ISO/IEC revisions were developed with international functions specifed in ISO/IEC 19790. Testing will support and the collaboration of governments, be conducted at the defned boundary of the industry and academia. cryptographic module and using Input/Output (I/O) available at the defned boundary. TS 30104:2015 17825:2016 First Edition First Edition 19790:2012 24759:2014 (Published 05-15-2015) maT en te d h ns o ot tt d neo s -so i t ntl o f voo ar rl se iq u vu s ec ei ar le ai im tb n tr ae ta cen t ksit to s i n n g T i( neP vs mu t ab i sinl ti ig is vgh em ae t ad e i t ot th a0 no c1 kd o-1 s f 5 cn- lf2 o ao0 snr s1 ­ et6 h s) e ( (P CS u ob re l ric es c Sho te en ed d cd u0 1E 8 2 ri-d - t1 1 yi 5 5t - -i 2o 20 0n 1 1 2 5) ) ( TP euT sbl th i s ri h er ed qd u E 0 ird 3 e-i 0 mt 1io - e2n n0 t1 s7 ) SeA cP t uTth a recy ic tys hk i nsc R,a i q eMl u q S e uite si ic g ru eaa mnr ti dit eoy n n t s mitigation techniques in against cryptographic requirements for for modules cryptographic cryptographic modules - cryptographic Part 1: Test tools and modules modules techniques Testtool requirements 18367:2016 TS 20540 20543 and testtool calibration First Edition methods for use in testing (Published 12-15-2016) Competence GU uin dd ee lir nd ee sv e fl oo rp m Tee sn tt i ng U Tn ed se t r a d ne dv e al no ap lm yse in st cm r Pyi aptn i rto g to :n a g t- 2rii o an Tpnv h e a sis t c tei v c ce h am n lioa i bqt d rt u u aa e tc l is ek o s n i -n al cg oo nr fC i omtr h ry e mmp c at s ho nag a cnn era d ip s m th s ei e ssc c t u ir ngit y tei sn tr f ee o rq r sC m uo i a arm e t nimp doe net e ne vn t ss aec lce uu af ro ti or t ry s tei sn tr f ee o rq r smu i a are t nim do ne e n vt ss ae lc uu af ro ti or t ry s Cr iy np tt ho Eeg nir r va ip O rh opi nc e m ra eM t no i to d nu al le s bm 1ite S t g 0h e /o Ind Ees C r a 1f t 9o o 7r r 9sr 0a wn d ait no h dm i n methods and apparatus - Part 1: Introduction, - Part 2: Knowledge, 1S0/IEC 15408 skills and effectiveness concepts and general requirements for requirements 1S0/IEC 19790 testers 15 Figure 2: Cryptographic Module Testing – ISO Standards NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017International Standard ISO/IEC 18367 describes INCITS 499-2013, was published in FY 2013 conformance testing methods for cryptographic and is currently under revision. algorithms and security mechanisms. Conformance • Next Generation Access Control – Generic testing assures that an implementation of a Operations & Abstract Data Structures cryptographic algorithm or security mechanism is (NGAC-GOADS). Serban Gavrila, ITL, is the correct whether implemented in hardware, software editor. The project is assigned project number or frmware. It also confrms that it runs correctly 2195-D, and the document was published in a specifc operating environment. Testing may during FY 2016. consist of known-answer or Monte Carlo testing, or a combination of test methods. Testing may be • Next Generation Access Control – performed on the actual implementation or modeled Implementation Requirements, Protocols in a simulation environment. and API Defnitions (NGAC-IRPADS). Project number 2193-D has been assigned. This part The test methods used by testing laboratories to will be published in FY 2018. test whether the cryptographic module conforms to the requirements specifed in ISO/IEC 19790 and the CONTACTS: test metrics specifed in this International Standard Mr. David Ferraiolo Mr. Serban Gavrila for each of the associated security functions specifed (301) 975-3046 (301) 975-4343 in ISO/IEC 19790 are specifed in ISO/IEC 24759. The david.ferraiolo@nist.gov serban.gavrila@nist.gov test approach employed in this International Standard is an efcient “push-button” approach: the tests are technically sound, repeatable and have moderate Identity Management Devices and costs. Standards FOR MORE INFORMATION, SEE: In the area of Identity Tokens and Secure https://csrc.nist.gov/Projects/Cryptographic-Mod- elements, ITL has provided the technical and editorial ule-Validation-Program support of Mr. Ketan Mehta (CSD) in the development and amendment of American National Standard CONTACT: (ANS) 504, Generic Identity Command Set (GICS). Mr. Randall J. Easter GICS enables Personal Identity Verifcation (PIV), (240) 361-8777 PIV-Interoperable (PIV-I) and Common Access Card randall.easter@nist.gov (CAC) applications, and others, to be built from a single platform. GICS defnes an open platform where Next Generation Access Control identity applications can be instantiated, deployed, and used in an interoperable way between the Standards credential issuers and credential users that aligns with the last revision of the NIST SP 800-73-4, Interfaces ITL has continued the development of an advanced for Personal Identity Verifcation, (PIV) specifcations. Attribute Based Access Control (ABAC) framework called the Policy Machine, which was designed to be During FY 2017, the ITL staf: in alignment with an emerging ANSI/INCITS standard under the title of “Next Generation Access Control” • Contributed to the publication of several (NGAC). revisions of the ISO/IEC 7816 family of standards (Identifcation cards - Integrated The NIST Policy Machine research and circuit cards), which are all relevant to FIPS development efort has resulted in three ongoing 201, Personal Identity Verifcation (PIV) national standards projects in CS1 that are in the early of Federal Employees and Contractors, stages of development. They include: specifcations; • Next Generation Access Control – Functional 16 Architecture (NGAC-FA). Project number ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017• Pursued the standardization and 18013) for an International Mobile Driver License (DL). harmonization of identity standards that were ITL gathered and discussed functional and security developed in the U.S.; requirements for Mobile DLs, and is now developing two models: ofine and online. Once these models are • Developed requirements and identifed fully defned, ITL plans to write technical specifcations standards gaps for Mobile Driving Licenses; for each model. • Actively participated in the development of a CONTACTS: standards for Mobile Driving Licenses; Mr. Salvatore Francomacaro Mr. Ketan Mehta • Enhanced the Machine-Readable Travel (301) 975-6414 (301) 975-8405 Documents (ePassport) data model to salvatore.francomacaro@nist.gov ketan.mehta@nist.gov address privacy and security concerns; and • Contributed to the development of a standard Identity Management International for privacy-enhanced security protocols for Standardization with ISO/IEC SC27 secure elements. During FY 2017, NIST ACD’s Trusted Identities The ITL staf will continue to actively support Group (TIG) collaborated with representatives from relevant ID management standard initiatives, such as the United Kingdom (U.K.) Cabinet Ofce and the ISO/IEC 19286, Integrated circuit card (ICC) Privacy- Canadian Treasury Board to identify commonalities enhancing protocols and services, and ISO/IEC 18328, and work to align the digital identity standards and ICC managed devices. requirements among the respective national digital Web Authentication/FIDO: ITL participates in the identity programs, particularly SP 800-63-3 for development of online authentication specifcations. the U.S. and the U.K. Good Practice Guides (GPG). These specifcations are developed by the Fast The goal in these eforts is to promote a vibrant Identities Online (FIDO) alliance, which is a consortium market of internationally viable identity services and of private organizations. ITL also participates in advance the secure exchange of digital identities the development of similar specifcations (called while protecting the privacy of the subjects of those WebAuthn) for web browsers that are being developed identities for cross-border transactions and mutual by the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C). Both the recognition. While primarily focused on developing a FIDO and WebAuthn specifcations enable relying framework that would facilitate the establishment of parties to create cryptographic tokens on the end- a common set of requirements and standards across user’s device and subsequently use this cryptographic the three national programs, there was increasing token to authenticate the end user. These specifcations interest from other national programs and industry provide multi-factor authentication directives, and in the work products and methodologies developed they are designed to mitigate common threat vectors by this collaborative work. As a result, the group for Internet communications, such as phishing, man- provided this work to the international community as in-the-middle, and replay attacks. a series of aligned joint contributions for international standardization. ePassport: ITL participates in the development of an ISO/IEC standard (ISO/IEC 7501) for electronic The TIG contributions, in collaboration with their Passports. Specifcally, ITL is contributing to the British and Canadian partners, were focused on development of passport data structure and its access establishing a synchronized core set of international control. ITL reviews and comments on authentication identity management standards within the scope of protocols that are developed to ensure strong user the activities of ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 27/WG 5, which authentication and to protect personally identifable oversees the development of international standards passport data. for identity management and privacy. The team provided contributions to synchronize and align the Mobile Driver License: ITL is also participating following ISO/IEC standards with the U.K., Canadian, 17 in the development of an ISO standard (ISO/IEC and U.S. harmonization work: NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017• ISO/IEC 29115 Information Technology — blockchain technologies and architectures. NIST has Security techniques — Entity authentication been participating in these activities via the national assurance framework – a major revision is mirror committee within the InterNational Committee required to align with SP 800-63 B and GPG for Information Technology Standards (INCITS). ISO/ 44; TC 307 will meet in November 2017, where the reports on these topics will be reviewed and new work will be • ISO/IEC 29003 Information technology — established. Security techniques — Identity proofng; CONTACTS: • ISO 31000 Risk management framework Mr. Dylan Yaga Dr. Lily Chen applied to identity-related risk, a new work (301)-975-6004 (301) 975-6974 project for a new international standard that dylan.yaga@nist.gov lily.chen@nist.gov will be aligned with the risk management section of NIST SP 800-63-3; Internet of Things (IoT) • Identity related standards landscape, a new work project to establish a clear and aligned NIST/ITL has contributed to standardization landscape for ISO/IEC identity standards and activities for the IoT architecture and vocabulary administrative processes and to establish rules during FY 2017 in three primary areas: for how the development and maintenance of an aligned set of identity management • The Industrial Internet Consortium (IIC); standards could be coordinated and managed • ISO/IEC SC41, Internet of Things and related within ISO/IEC WG5; and technologies; and • Identity assurance framework, a new work • IEEE P2413, Standard for an Architectural project for a new international standard that Framework for the Internet of Things (IoT). will be aligned with the identity assurance components of SP 800-63A and the U.K. GPG Focus was on the architecture, vocabulary, and 45. recently, edge computing. In addition to working on standards related to these areas, NIST staf member CONTACT: Eric Simmon is the chair of the IIC commenting Mr. David Temoshok working group for reviewing the IEEE p2413 draft (202) 482-5475 standard and is the liaison between ISO/IEC SC41- david.temoshok@nist.gov ISO/IEC SC38 (cloud computing). The NIST staf has also participated to the activities Blockchains in ISO/IEC SC27 relative to IoT Security. This activity will be further developed during FY 2018. During FY 2017, NIST participated in standards activities exploring blockchain technologies, CONTACTS: architectures, and use cases. These included Mr. Eric Simmon Ms. Katerina Megas participation in a new blockchain study group (301) 975-3956 (202) 441-1147 sponsored by the American Standards Committee eric.simmon@nist.gov katerina.megas@nist.gov X9, the fnancial services committee of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), and continued work in the International Standards Organization Cloud Computing Standards (ISO) Technical Committee (TC) for Blockchains Developed Within ISO/IEC JTC 1 and Distributed Ledger Technologies (ISO/TC 307). Established in 2016, the initial objectives of ISO/TC 307 ITL is actively engaged with several key players include defning key terms and concepts, exploring in the Federal Government which look broadly at reference architectures, investigating use cases, and questions of IT standards, how to infuence them, and 18 identifying identity and privacy implications within ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017how to use them. These participants include the Ofce of ISO/IEC 19941, Information technology–Cloud of Management and Budget (OMB) E-Gov Ofce and computing–Interoperability and portability, which Ofce of Information and Regulatory Afairs, the is expected to be published by the end of 2017. federal Chief Information Ofcers (CIO) Council, the The document is intended to establish a common Interagency Council on Standards Policy (ICSP), and understanding of cloud computing interoperability the General Services Administration (GSA) Ofce of and portability. Both interoperability and portability Government-wide Policy. Our goal in chairing the ofer more choices to cloud users by limiting the Standards Working Group is to solicit requirements efects of being locked-in to any cloud service or cloud from federal agencies, fnd the appropriate voluntary service provider. ISO/IEC 19941 joins many published standards committee that is addressing these cloud computing standards that were developed from requirements and encourage participation to ensure NIST publications, such as: the government requirements are being adequately • ISO/IEC 17788, Information technology -- met. Where standards are needed, ITL works Cloud computing -- Overview and vocabulary; closely with U.S. industry, standards development organizations, other government agencies, and • ISO/IEC 17789, Information technology -- leaders in the global standards community to develop Cloud computing -- Reference architecture; standards that will support secure cloud computing. and, ITL participation helps to ensure the alignment • ISO/IEC 19086, Information technology -- of NIST standards with those of ISO/IEC JTC 1 sub- Cloud computing -- Service level agreement committees, such as SC 27 IT Security techniques, (SLA) framework. SC 38 Cloud Computing and Distributed Platforms, and their U.S. counterparts, ANSI/ INCITS Cyber CONTACT: Security 1 (CS 1) and Cloud 38. The large number of Ms. Annie Sokol standards being developed in SC 27 covering areas (301) 975-2006 such as security, cryptography, privacy, supply chain, annie.sokol@nist.gov personally identifable information (PII) processing or virtualization security, harmonize with many cloud computing standards being developed by these RISK MANAGEMENT subcommittees. The focus of implementing cloud computing is even more critical since the White House released Framework for Improving Critical an IT Modernization Report in September 2017 that Infrastructure Cybersecurity includes recommendations for agencies to take (Cybersecurity Framework) steps to secure and modernize federal IT networks. Those steps for modernizing and consolidating Recognizing that the national and economic networks point to cloud computing, modernization of security of the United States depends on the reliable government-hosted applications, and better security functioning of its critical infrastructure, the President for legacy systems. Federal modernization eforts, issued Executive Order (EO) 13636: Improving Critical such as those connected with the Modernizing Infrastructure Cybersecurity, in February of 2013. This Government Technology Act, may further enable EO directed NIST to work with stakeholders to develop agencies to accelerate investments in cloud and other a voluntary framework – based on existing standards, new technologies. guidelines, and practices − for reducing cybersecurity risks to critical infrastructures. Ms. Annie Sokol is a member of ITL’s Cloud Computing team and is the CSD representative in The Cybersecurity Framework that was the standards development program. ITL provides developed provides a prioritized, fexible, repeatable, technical and editorial representation in the performance-based, and cost-efective approach to 19 development of national and international standards help critical infrastructure owners and operators—as in both SC 27 and SC 38. Ms. Sokol is the co-editor NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017well as other interested entities—identify, assess, and the Framework; manage cybersecurity-related risk while protecting • Consulting with international organizations business confdentiality, individual privacy, and civil and standards bodies to demonstrate and liberties. ensure continued alignment with voluntary In FY 2017, NIST continued to work with a diverse international standards; and stakeholder community to support the use and • Working with both industry and regulatory understanding of the Cybersecurity Framework. This organizations to apply the Framework in process included: ways that bring efciencies to the regulatory • Publication of a draft Framework 1.1 to clarify, process. refne, and enhance the Cybersecurity Since the release of the Framework, NIST’s primary Framework, drawing upon comments received goal has been to raise awareness of the Framework from a public review process launched in and encourage its use as a tool to help industry January 2017; sectors and organizations manage cybersecurity risks. • Conducting a public workshop at NIST in NIST has strengthened its collaboration with critical Gaithersburg, MD to gather input about the infrastructure owners and operators, industry leaders, current use of the Framework and feedback government partners, and other stakeholders— regarding the initial public draft; building on previous years’ interactions that were crucial to the Framework’s development. • Releasing the 1.0 version of the Baldrige Cybersecurity Excellence Builder, a self- In May 2017, Executive Order 13800 was released, assessment tool to help organizations directing federal agency heads to use the Framework better understand the efectiveness of their to manage agencies’ cybersecurity risk. NIST released cybersecurity risk-management eforts; draft NISTIR 8170, The Cybersecurity Framework: Implementation Guidance for Federal Agencies, to • Updates to the Framework website with a provide information on how Federal agencies can use catalog of industry resources, upcoming NIST the Cybersecurity Framework—and in particular, how speaking events, and an extensive frequently- the Risk Management Framework and Cybersecurity asked-question knowledge base; Framework work together to help agencies develop, implement, and continuously improve their • Provision of outreach for small- and medium- information security programs. sized businesses (SMBs), including guidance provided by the Applied Cybersecurity In FY 2018, NIST will continue to conduct Division (ACD) in NIST Interagency Report stakeholder outreach and will work collaboratively (NISTIR) 7621 Rev. 1, Small Business to further understand stakeholder needs regarding Information Security: The Fundamentals; tools and resources to enable more efective use of the Framework. Version 1.1 of the Framework is • Coordinating with critical infrastructure expected to be published, and NIST will continue to owners and operators, regulators, and other identify ways for the Framework to contribute to risk industry organizations through a variety of management initiatives. meetings and industry events to ensure the understanding and use of the Framework; FOR MORE INFORMATION, SEE: • Analyzing various industry work products https://www.nist.gov/cyberframework (such as mapping documents) for Framework CONTACTS: correctness; Mr. Matt Barrett Mr. Jef Marron • Consulting with state and local governments, (301) 975-6259 (301) 975-3846 and the governments of other nations matthew.barrett@nist.gov jefrey.marron@nist.gov regarding their alignment with both the 20 principles and the cybersecurity outcomes of ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017Federal Information Security • System Security Engineering Initiative: The fnal version of Special Publication (SP) Management Act (FISMA) 800-160, Systems Security Engineering: Implementation Project Considerations for a Multidisciplinary Approach in the Engineering of Trustworthy The FISMA Implementation Project focuses on: Secure Systems, was published to address the engineering-driven actions necessary • Developing a comprehensive series of to develop more defensible and survivable standards and guidelines to help federal systems—including the components that and nonfederal organizations build efective compose and the services that depend on information security programs, defend against those systems. To ensure that the publication increasingly sophisticated cyber-attacks, provides the utmost clarity and focus for and demonstrate compliance to security our customers, several of the supporting requirements set forth in legislation, Executive appendices from the second public draft are Orders, Homeland Security Directives, and being recast into their own publications. SP OMB policies; and 800-160 is the fagship publication for the • Conducting outreach to public and NIST Systems Security Engineering Initiative. private-sector organizations to facilitate NIST publications specifcally addressing the application of the suite of standards several key systems security engineering and guidelines that support the NIST Risk considerations (i.e., resilience, software Management Framework (RMF) (see https:// assurance, and hardware assurance) will be csrc.nist.gov/Projects/Risk-Management). developed and published, beginning in 2018. Additionally, the interaction of the NIST RMF During FY 2017, the ITL FISMA Implementation with the life cycle processes in SP 800-160, project continued to strengthen collaboration through will be described in future updates to existing the Joint Task Force (JTF) Transformation Initiative, RMF standards and guidelines. which includes the Department of Defense (DoD), the Intelligence Community (IC), the Committee on • Risk Management Guidelines: Work National Security Systems (CNSS), and various federal continued on SP 800-53 Revision 5, Security agencies. The JTF partners continue to develop and and Privacy Controls for Information Systems update key cybersecurity guidelines for protecting and Organizations. The initial public draft federal information and information systems as was published after collaboration with a part of the Unifed Information Security Framework. federal interagency working group, the OMB, Previously, the JTF developed common security NIST, other agency privacy professionals, guidance in the critical areas of security controls and our JTF partners. SP 800-53 provides for information systems and organizations, security organizations with the security and privacy assessment procedures to demonstrate security controls necessary to appropriately strengthen control efectiveness, security authorizations for risk their systems and the environments in acceptance decisions, and continuous monitoring which those systems operate, and provides activities to ensure that decision makers receive the a process for selecting the appropriate most up-to-date information on the security state of controls, which contributes to systems that their information systems. In addition, ITL continued are resilient in the face of attacks and other to work with the Department of Homeland Security threats and protect an individual’s privacy. (DHS) to develop guidelines for automation support The FISMA Team, in conjunction with the for security control assessments on a security same group of collaborators, also published capability basis and in accordance with the NIST RMF a discussion draft of SP 800-37 Revision 2, as well as on developing guidance and a security Risk Management Framework for Information controls overlay to protect federal high value assets. Systems and Organizations. SP 800-37 Revision 2 provides a closer link between risk 21 In FY 2017, the ITL FISMA Team worked on the following initiatives: NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017management processes and activities at the 1. SP 800-30, Guide for Conducting Risk executive level of the organization, with risk Assessments; management activities at the system and 2. SP 800-37, Guide for Applying the Risk operational level; institutionalizes enterprise- Management Framework to Federal wide risk management preparatory activities Information Systems: a Security Life Cycle to facilitate a more efcient and cost- Approach; efective execution of the Risk Management Framework at the system and operational 3. SP 800-39, Managing Information level; demonstrates how the Cybersecurity Security Risk: Organization, Mission, and Framework can be implemented using the Information System View; established Risk Management Framework processes; and integrates privacy concepts 4. SP 800-53, Security and Privacy Controls into the Risk Management Framework. The for Federal Information Systems and implementation of SP 800-53, SP 800-37, and Organizations; and SP 800-137, Information Security Continuous 5. SP 800-53A, Assessing Security and Monitoring for Federal Information Systems Privacy Controls in Federal Information and Organizations, provides organizations Systems and Organizations: Building with near real-time information that is Efective Assessment Plans. essential for senior leaders making ongoing risk-based decisions afecting their critical The FISMA Team also collaborated with DoD, missions and business functions. the IC, DHS, the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA), the Federal Emergency • FISMA Outreach Activity to Public and Management Agency (FEMA), the Government Private-Sector Organizations: Cybersecurity Accountability Ofce (GAO), the OMB, the General outreach briefngs were conducted and Services Administration (GSA), the Small Business support was provided to all levels of private- Administration (SBA), and the Inspectors General sector organizations and government (IGs) on multiple projects to ensure consistency with (including federal, state and local entities) on FISMA-related guidance and to protect information in multiple information security topics of interest. a way that is commensurate with risk. In addition, the These included, for example, an efective FISMA Team served as co-chairs on the CNSS working implementation of the NIST RMF, contingency groups. planning, interconnection security agreements, security-focused confguration In FY 2017, the FISMA Team completed the management, and information security for following activities: small businesses. In addition, the ITL FISMA Team responded to hundreds of inquiries from • Published the fnal version of SP 800-160, customers, served on cybersecurity advisory Systems Security Engineering: Considerations panels, conducted outreach activities with for a Multidisciplinary Approach in the academic institutions, provided information on Engineering of Trustworthy Secure Systems; NIST’s security standards and guidelines, and • Published the initial public draft of SP 800-53 explored new areas of cybersecurity research Revision 5, Security and Privacy Controls for and development. Systems and Organizations; • Collaboration with JTF partners and • Published the discussion draft of SP 800-37 other federal organizations: The FISMA Revision 2, Risk Management Framework for Team worked closely with JTF partners to Federal Information Systems: A System Life ensure that the fve JTF publications remain Cycle Approach for Security and Privacy; current, and to designate additional Special Publications as JTF guidance. The fve JTF • Published the fnal version of SP 800-171 publications are: 22 Revision 1, Protecting Controlled Unclassifed ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017Information in Nonfederal Information Systems A System Life Cycle Approach for Security and and Organizations, to provide guidance Privacy; to federal agencies for the protection of • Complete the development of and Controlled Unclassifed Information when such operationalize the web application for the information is resident in nonfederal systems automated support of SP 800-53 updates and and organizations; the public comment process; • Published fnal versions of NIST Interagency • Continue the collaboration with DHS to Report (NISTIR) 8011, Automation Support for develop and publish additional NISTIR 8011 Ongoing Assessments, Volume 1 - Overview, volumes; and Volume 2 - Hardware Asset Management, and adjudicated public comments in • Finalize and publish the initial public draft partnership with DHS; of SP 800-60 Revision 2, Guide for Mapping Types of Information and Information Systems • Published the fnal version of An Introduction to Security Categories, in partnership with to Information Security; NARA and OMB; • Continued the development of a web • Publish the initial public draft and fnal version application to automate the process for of SP 800-53A, Assessing Security and updating SP 800-53 in order to keep it as Privacy Controls in Information Systems and current and relevant as possible; Organizations; • Continued the development of SP 800- • Publish the initial public draft and fnal version 60, Revision 2, Guide for Mapping Types of SP 800-171A, Assessing Security Controls in of Information and Information Systems to Nonfederal Systems; Security Categories, in partnership with the National Archives and Records Administration • Continue the development of SP 800-18 (NARA); Revision 2, Guide for Developing System Security and Privacy Plans; • Continued the development of the initial public draft of SP 800-18 Revision 2, Guide for • Finalize and publish SP 800-47 Revision Developing System Security and Privacy Plans; 1, Information Exchange and System and Connections; • Continued the development of the • Update the RMF online course to Hypertext initial public draft of SP 800-47 Revision Markup Language version 5 (HTML5) and 1, Information Exchange and System verify consistency with SP 800-37 Revision 2; Connections. • Expand cybersecurity outreach to include In FY 2018, the FISMA Team intends to: additional state, local, and tribal governments, as well as private-sector organizations and • Continue work on SP 800-160 companion academic institutions; publications; • Continue to support federal agencies in the • Finalize and publish the fnal version of SP efective implementation of the RMF; and 800-53 Revision 5, Security and Privacy Controls for Information Systems and • Continue the collaboration with JTF partners Organizations; and other federal organizations. • Finalize and publish the fnal version of SP 800-37 Revision 2, Risk Management FOR MORE INFORMATION, SEE: Framework for Federal Information Systems: 23 https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/risk-management NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017CONTACTS: by the OMB’s July 2016 update to Circular A-130, which emphasized federal agencies’ The ITL FISMA Team email is: sec-cert@nist.gov responsibilities to manage privacy risk, not just compliance risk, and now requires them to apply the Dr. Ron Ross Ms. Victoria Pillitteri NIST Risk Management Framework to their privacy (301) 975-5390 (301) 975-8542 programs. ron.ross@nist.gov victoria.pillitteri@nist.gov Advancement of Privacy Engineering and Risk Mr. Nedim Goren Ms. Jody Jacobs Management (301) 975-5233 (301) 975-4728 nedim.goren@nist.gov jody.jacobs@nist.gov In January 2017, the PEP reached a major milestone in advancing the development of privacy Ms. Kelley Dempsey engineering and risk management processes with the (301) 975-2827 fnalization of NISTIR 8062, An Introduction to Privacy kelley.dempsey@nist.gov Engineering and Risk Management in Federal Systems (see https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8062). NISTIR Editor’s Note: Ms. Peggy Himes worked on this 8062 introduces the concept of applying systems project until her recent retirement. engineering practices to privacy and provides a new model for conducting privacy risk assessments Privacy Engineering Program on federal systems. It also presents the PEP’s initial roadmap (See Figure 3) for guidance development to The NIST Privacy Engineering Program (PEP) help agencies more efectively meet new obligations supports the development of trustworthy information under the revised Circular A-130. systems by applying measurement science and system In FY 2017, the PEP team collaborated with engineering principles to the creation of frameworks, internal and external partners to successfully integrate risk models, guidance, tools, and standards that privacy requirements and considerations into SP 800- protect privacy and, by extension, civil liberties. 63-3, Digital Identity Guidelines. The PEP team also In FY 2017, the PEP focused on advancing collaborated to integrate privacy into the draft revisions the development of privacy engineering and risk of SPs 800-53, Revision 5, Security and Privacy management processes and the deployment Controls for Information Systems and Organizations, of privacy-enhancing technologies (as well as and 800-37, Revision 2, Risk Management Framework positioning NIST as a leader in privacy research). for Information Systems and Organizations, building Many of the PEP’s eforts in FY 2017 were fueled the foundation of making privacy and security equal SP 800-18 SP 800-30 SP 800-37 SP 800-39 SP 800-53 Guide for Managing Security Guide for Applying the Information and Privacy Developing Guide for Risk Security Risk- Controls for Security Plans Conducting Management Organization, Federal for Federal Risk Framework to Mission, and Information Information Assessments Federal Information Systems and Systems Information System View Organizations Systems SP 800-53A SP 800-60 SP 800-63-3 SP 800-122 SP 800-160 Vol. I; Guide for Guide for Mappir,g Types Guide to Assessing the of Information and Security 1In 0 fo Sr em cua rt ii to y n c S ay ts et gem ors ie s Digital CPr oo nt fe idc etin ng tia t lih tye Systems FC eo dn etr ro al ls in a lon d G uV lo del. I fI o: rA Mpp ae pn pd lr,i gc es Identity of Personally S Ee nc gu inr eit ey r ing Information T any dp e Is nf o of r mIn afo tir om n ation Guidel;;;/ I Id ne fon rt mifi aa tb iole n (PII) Systems Systems to Security categories Figure 3: PEP guidance roadmap for integrating privacy risk management into NIST SPs, featuring 24 integrations underway during FY 2017 (highlighted in green). ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017quality attributes in trustworthy systems. The PEP NIST Leadership in Privacy team also contributed privacy concepts to the Trusted The PEP team built upon NIST’s leadership role Identities Group (TIG) measurement science efort, in privacy by serving in leadership positions and draft NISTIR 8112, Attribute Metadata. contributing to privacy expertise organizations across The PEP team also contributed to ongoing the public and private sectors. These leadership standards and framework development eforts in positions included: the chair of the Federal Privacy the International Organization for Standardization Council’s Risk Management Task Force and co-chair of (ISO), Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers the Networking and Information Technology Research (IEEE), and the Fast Identity Online (FIDO) Alliance. and Development (NITRD) Program’s Privacy Specifcally, the PEP team worked on ISO/IEC 27552, Research and Development (R&D) Interagency which is a privacy-focused sector-specifc extension Working Group. The PEP team also participated in the of the information security-focused ISO/IEC 27001, Internet Policy Task Force’s Privacy Working Group, and ISO/IEC 27550, a technical report on privacy the FIDO Alliance’s Privacy and Public Policy Working engineering. The PEP team also supported the Group, and the Identity Ecosystem Steering Group. development of IEEE P7002, an efort in its early stages that also addresses privacy engineering. The Looking Forward PEP team also engaged with FIDO to help develop privacy-enhancing authentication specifcations. In FY 2018, the PEP team will continue developing privacy risk management guidance for agencies, Continuing the ongoing series of NIST workshops including fnalizing SP 800-53 Revision 5, and SP on privacy engineering and risk management, 800-37 Revision 2. The PEP team will also collaborate building of the concepts introduced in NISTIR 8062, with internal and external stakeholders to kick of the PEP team hosted the June 2017 workshop, the integration of privacy guidance into SP 800-53A “Privacy Risk Assessment: A Prerequisite for Privacy Revision 5, Assessing Security and Privacy Controls Risk Management” (see https://www.nist.gov/news- in Federal Information Systems and Organizations, events/events/2017/06/privacy-risk-assessment- and implement the provisions of other documents prerequisite-privacy-risk-management). Feedback laid out in the guidance roadmap. The PEP team will received included the need for further integration of continue supporting the development of international privacy into risk management and security guidance, standards focused on privacy engineering and risk a privacy-specifc risk assessment model, and a toolset management. to manage privacy risk. These takeaways aligned well with the PEP team’s ongoing eforts and goals for The PEP team will place a greater focus on future work. its goal of advancing the deployment of privacy- enhancing technologies. The PEP team has already In support of a privacy-specifc risk assessment begun exploring whether stakeholders see a need tool, the PEP team continued socializing the use of for an online space where collaborators can discuss, its Privacy Risk Assessment Methodology (PRAM) learn about, and improve upon tools, solutions, and inside and outside the Federal Government. As of processes that support privacy engineering and FY 2017, more than 30 public- and private-sector risk management. The PEP team will also explore organizations have used or are using the PRAM, the management of privacy risk in leading-edge including participants in NIST’s trusted identities domains, such as the internet of things (IoT) and pilots and a few federal agencies. artifcial intelligence (AI). Specifcally, the PEP team The PEP team also collaborated on projects at the will collaborate with NIST’s Cybersecurity for the IoT National Cybersecurity Center of Excellence (NCCoE), program to tackle IoT-specifc privacy challenges including the Privacy-Enhancing Identity Federation through workshops and guidance. building block, which demonstrates the use of the The PEP team will continue to seek leadership NIST privacy engineering objectives (see https:// opportunities in public- and private-sector organizations nccoe.nist.gov/projects/building-blocks/privacy- 25 to strengthen NIST’s position as a leader in privacy. enhanced-identity-brokers). Finally, the PEP team will continue working with a NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017variety of organizations to manage privacy risk using Cyber Supply Chain Risk Management (C-SCRM) the PRAM, such as using it in the NCCoE’s Mobile lies at the intersection of information security, supply Device Security building block. chain management, and enterprise risk management (Figure 4); it is the process of identifying, assessing, FOR MORE INFORMATION, SEE: and mitigating the risks associated with the distributed https://www.nist.gov/itl/privacy-engineering and interconnected nature of IT/OT product and service supply chains. C-SCRM covers the entire life CONTACTS: cycle of a system (including design, development, PEP Team email: privacyeng@nist.gov maintenance, and destruction), as supply chain threats and vulnerabilities may intentionally or unintentionally Ms. Naomi Lefkovitz Ms. Ellen Nadeau compromise an IT/OT product or service at any (301) 975-2924 (202) 306-4033 stage. These cyber supply chain risks may include naomi.lefkovitz@nist.gov ellen.nadeau@nist.gov the use of counterfeits, unauthorized production, tampering, theft, and insertion of malicious software Ms. Katie Boeckl and hardware, as well as poor manufacturing and (240) 753-9674 development practices. As shown in Figure 5, C-SCRM kaitlin.boeckl@nist.gov is concerned with and involves a range of subjects, including safety, integrity, quality, reliability, and others, all within an overall environment of awareness. Cyber Supply Chain Risk Management (C-SCRM) Figure 4: C-SCRM Disciplines Figure 5: C-SCRM Aspects Over the last several years, providing information In FY 2017, NIST drafted NISTIR 8179, Criticality and operational technology (IT/OT) for a supply chain Analysis Process Model, a method for identifying has evolved into a complex, globally distributed, and prioritizing IT/OT systems and components. This dynamic ecosystem enabling the development of model is intended to increase an organization’s ability highly refned, sophisticated, cost-efective, and to make cost-efective risk decisions by determining reusable solutions. This ecosystem is composed of the systems and components that have the most assorted entities with multiple tiers of outsourcing, impact on the organization and that would potentially global distribution routes, diverse technologies, and cause the most harm if compromised. Figure 6 shows varying laws, policies, procedures, and practices, all of an overview of the model, which includes separate which interact throughout the life cycle of a system. analyses at the program, system, and component Factors that allow for low-cost products, rapid level, and then a trace-back exercise to complete the innovation, and other benefts also increase the risk analysis. NIST will fnalize this publication in FY 2018 that the supply chain may be compromised in a way and will begin to research and write guidance that that results in risks to the end user and reduce the overall competitiveness of U.S. companies. builds on this model to identify critical suppliers and 26 service providers. ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017. Define & Scope _____________ ...._.,_ _____________________ _ • ... 13. Program-Level I ~II C. System-Level I II D. Componen -Level Analysis I Analysis I ~ II Analysis I II.!-::::::::::,-'==.-====~ • ~ , L----------------------- ...- ------------· E. Traceback Figure 6: Criticality Analysis Process Overview During 2017, NIST continued to research the state of establishes minimum criteria for the development C-SCRM in both the public and private sectors, related and deployment of supply chain risk management standards and initiatives, efective practices, and capabilities for national security systems. In FY 2017, metrics. NIST joined with the GSA and the University the group completed the revision of CNSSD 505 and of Maryland under a contract and grant awarded in developed a self-assessment tool to help agencies FY 2016 to conduct cyber analytics research on the measure their capabilities and compare those efectiveness of various risk management practices. capabilities to those of other agencies. The efort neared conclusion in FY 2017 and found NIST also sponsored the Software and Supply correlations between certain practices and publicly Chain Assurance (SSCA) Forum and Working Groups, disclosed data breaches. A report on the research will the purpose of which is to bring together a stakeholder be published in FY 2018. community of government, industry, and academic Similarly, NIST began research in FY 2017 experts in this feld. Meetings are held three to four to identify metrics that are currently used in times a year and cover a variety of subjects of interest organizations to measure information security risks. to attendees (see the website at https://csrc.nist.gov/ This research included a review of over 200 published scrm/ssca). standards, academic papers, organizational white- NIST began working in FY 2017 to integrate papers, and other documents and interviews with a C-SCRM into existing risk management programs and dozen industry experts on the state of metrics in this processes. The draft Cybersecurity Framework v1.1 feld. The research will be continued and published in and Draft SP 800-53 Revision 5 were both updated FY 2018. to better include up-to-date C-SCRM guidance. In NIST continued to co-chair a working group FY 2018, NIST will continue this work by including with the DoD to revise CNSSD 505, Supply Chain or updating existing C-SCRM concepts in other Risk Management, which assigns responsibilities and publications as they are developed. 27 NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017In FY 2018, NIST will continue to collaborate with of career professionals, including government ofcials, stakeholders in government, industry, and academia chief information security ofcers, those in academia to conduct research, produce needed standards and with cybersecurity and supply chain specialties, guidance, and seek opportunities to create greater system administrators, engineers, consultants, awareness across all sectors and types and sizes of vendors, software developers, managers, analysts, organizations. NIST will: specialists in IT and cybersecurity, and many more felds. The SSCA Forum meets two to three times per • Update SP 800-161 based on the fnal year and is free and open to all interested participants, publication of SP 800-53 Revision 5, both nationally and internationally. • Continue developing industry supply chain While the general intent is to share information, risk management case studies, the SSCA Forum also ofers government and private-sector participants an opportunity to openly • Develop a draft NISTIR on SCRM “principles”, collaborate by presenting and receiving feedback on • Develop a NISTIR on Supply Chain current and potential future work. Most events are two Interdependency Analysis, and to three days long and contain a mixture of discussion and presentation. To encourage open interaction, • Continue research and work on metrics and SSCA Forum meetings operate under the Chatham cyber risk analytics. House Rule, meaning “participants are free to use the information received, but neither the identity nor FOR MORE INFORMATION, SEE: the afliation of the speaker(s), nor that of any other https://scrm.nist.gov participant, may be revealed,” though most speakers allow NIST to post their presentations. CONTACTS: Cyber SCRM Team email: scrm-nist@nist.gov The SSCA Forum also maintains an extensive email subscription service. To receive information Ms. Celia Paulsen Mr. Jon Boyens about upcoming meetings and related publications (301) 975-5981 (301) 975-5549 and activities, please sign up for the SSCA Forum celia.paulsen@nist.gov jon.boyens@nist.gov mailing list, operated by NIST, by sending a blank email to sw.assurance-join@nist.gov. Software and Supply Chain FOR MORE INFORMATION, SEE: Assurance Forum https://csrc.nist.gov/Projects/Supply-Chain-Risk- Management/SSCA Cyber supply chain risk management (hardware CONTACTS: and software assurance and assured services) has become a topic of core strategic concern for business Ms. Celia Paulsen Mr. Jon Boyens and government leaders worldwide and is an essential (301) 975-5981 (301) 975-5549 component of an enterprise risk management celia.paulsen@nist.gov jon.boyens@nist.gov strategy. The Software and Supply Chain Assurance (SSCA) Forum provides a venue for government, industry, and academic participants from around the world to share their knowledge and expertise regarding cyber supply chain risks, efective practices and mitigation strategies, tools and technologies, and any gaps related to the people, processes, or technologies involved. The efort, initiated in 2003, is co-led by NIST, DHS, DoD and GSA, and serves approximately 3,000 28 stakeholders. Participants represent a diverse group ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017BIOMETRIC STANDARDS AND was then required to code each of the assertions listed in the CTM documentation. This process required ASSOCIATED CONFORMITY a large amount of development time after the ASSESSMENT TESTING TOOLS publication of the standard and related CTM, and often resulted in long delays in the release of conformance tools. This approach also defned conformance tests statically, meaning that: ITL supports the development of biometric conformance testing methodology standards and • End users with domain-specifc requirements other conformity assessment eforts through active or user-defned felds were not able to modify technical participation in the development of these the conformance tests or parsing rules. standards and the development of associated conformance test software, architectures and test • Any modifcation to the base standard suites, collectively known as Biometric Conformance requirements or subsequent revision of the Test Software (BioCTS). These test tools are developed standard required a new release of BioCTS to promote the adoption of these standards and applications. to support users, product developers, and testing To alleviate these issues, the new version of labs that require conformance to selected biometric BioCTS was designed to allow a modifcation of test standards. ITL contributes to the development of assertions and parsing rules. This approach required biometric standards and participates in the INCITS a confguration fle to specify requirements and allow Technical Committee M1 – Biometrics and related the software to respond to the needs of the end user. subcommittees and in ISO/IEC Joint Technical Committee (JTC) 1 Subcommittee (SC) 37 – Biometrics BioCTS AN MRT had two releases in FY 2017. standards bodies. The frst release included a command line interface (CLI) as well as a graphical user interface (GUI). It supported Level-1 testing, fle format testing that Bi CTS checks for the allowed content, length, and value for fve diferent standards and profles specifed within the AN MRTs. Since the MRT fles can be combined to support multiple standards, updates and profles, BioCTS AN MRT was designed to allow users to test against multiple standards during a single test. In early 2017, a suite of BioCTS applications was released to support user-defned requirements and profles for ANSI/NIST-ITL (AN-ITL) specifcations. _, llooCTSfDrl.NS!mm.ffl.Madw.a-iabll!lelti(fndibonalandNlt.MXMlfnn~ filt Help -·' These applications make use of confguration fles to dynamically generate parsing rules and conformance ''""" requirements for nearly any version or profle of the AN-ITL standard. The confguration fles utilize an ...a •>l l ...20 •1h dib •10 r~ )h ', ,b,ocol,trur~\AN~1 \T.-.diu C lo~oC 'P.. t," <alf iufO l :~ t~ tcA! t'I iC uc:C 1.' , r 1t H:u ; . ru~ t\U ; U T: I: ) fn, .r :: .t t :,nl- :D c: N .i.l "tl 1'! 11• Xl'tt. !:ncod:no Extensible Markup Language (XML)-based format ✓• ✓ r " r • 0 ~: ~\t \, A,, Mo( Ib N\t lr 5" 1" U"\ OD U.i. V~l it\ i2 M011\f,.i-t\ I l!.=-e ~t~: .Dli•O,•!? n:?3:i3Z n.,:c,11 l~ma: l!ll ~ ✓ ✓ ~~\AN$lNtS'1\l'011\Ntt:M I called ANSI/NIST-ITL Machine Readable Tables (MRTs) O·\b«b\tr""~~f\2013\1,.o,to P'Ltc Vi'U:SclT"u t: D;\b,,,;,m\lnri.\DMa~l0.0..5\ tl:\111.:.:t,.\tni:.ll\tl1t,1 \.ul.t~ttf\.2 C1-1\11Ilbi:aa.\:111l-a (see Figure 7 for an example output). The BioCTS AN- ~~Vt~T\t~110.o .si; fltlx i ltlunir:IeU : • T i4I iet ~! . ,1 J1 ~1U-c.•l~: leiU ~; ~l •i: 'Jilt • .:.K ! U !-l ~'l, ~V l ,! tU ~l'O • A?lU ~tr-tn ~: 0.,1,b,,offl\tr"""•,DeuWISP,ltSl\itbblOJ)J\ tatlX :SV.ttllailt4.r' t-121,1u: 1.utl!Jo.--ao o:uliUu .•lllto -.:K.uuubo oV1a1lu}-0l'~O1 1.ttt1'-co:ut ITL applications that use MRTs are collectively referred i);, ThIb 1ct ,~! 1!u e ~ ti' :, ., .:'l :l li e;u r !Ht~ .4t~ ~: .: ,: ui: h . V1.1ue l'...1~Cle.1-~!:.e ::iata t\!I to as BioCTS AN MRT. .tdll!ur.'tllkrlut : . ;l!\tl~ tJ\t=k \~ \!11CO$_;;ta_!o!ill\!11c,,;t$_),N__Ki(I\t' The development of BioCTS applications ---------------------------------..-.- S \- , - • ----·tcti1! traditionally relied on the publication of Conformance Testing Methodology (CTM) documentation, which specifed the test assertions required to assess Figure 7 - BioCTS AN MRT Testing Multiple conformance to requirements found in the related 29 Standards Within Single Test biometric standard. Manual software development NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017The second release included further refnements EAC and TGDC in eforts related to human factors, of the existing tools, and expanded the testing security, and laboratory accreditation. capabilities to include Level-2 testing, or the testing NIST and the EAC established a set of public of inter-feld as well as inter-record relationships, working groups to inform the development of a new checking data between two or more related data version of the Volunary Voting Systems Guidelines felds. The current release of BioCTS AN MRT supports (VVSG). The NIST and EAC goals are to accelerate all Level-1 and Level-2 tests defned by the MRTs. the development and adoption of the VVSG by Work on BioCTS AN MRT continued through FY leading these working groups in close consultation 2017, and an additional release that supports expanded with election ofcials, voting system manufacturers, character sets, as well as additional enhancements, is standards bodies, academic researchers, and other expected to be released in FY 2018. members of the public. These working groups focus on multiple voting system technology areas, including FOR MORE INFORMATION, SEE: accessibility, usability, interoperability, security, testing BioCTS - Biometric Conformance Test Tool and certifcation. Homepage: The cybersecurity public working group designed https://www.nist.gov/itl/csd/biometrics/biometric- principles and guidelines to form the basis for the conformance-test-software-biocts security requirements in the new version of the VVSG. Although 15 principles exist, the security-related BioCTS AN MRT: principles include auditability, ballot secrecy, physical https://www.nist.gov/itl/csd/biometrics/biocts- security, access control, system integrity, detection machine-readable-tables and monitoring, and data protection. Many of these principles are already included in previous iterations BioCTS AN MRT Changelog: of the federal standards, whereas others are new areas of focus (e.g., system integrity). These principles https://www.nist.gov/fle/384611 and guidelines were presented to, and adopted by, the BioCTS AN MRT User Guide: Technical Guidelines and Development Committee (TGDC). https://www.nist.gov/fle/384606 In FY 2018, NIST will continue leading the public working groups to inform the development of CONTACT: voting system requirements based on the principles Mr. Dylan Yaga and guidelines. Additionally, test assertions will be (301) 975-6004 developed to improve the quality and consistency dylan.yaga@nist.gov of testing activities by accredited voting system test laboratories (VSTLs). FOR MORE INFORMATION, SEE: CYBERSECURITY APPLICATIONS https://vote.nist.gov CONTACTS: Security Aspects of Electronic Voting Mr. Joshua Franklin Ms. Gema Howell (301) 975-8463 (301) 975-6299 In 2002, Congress passed the Help America joshua.franklin@nist.gov gema.howell@nist.gov Vote Act (HAVA) to encourage the upgrade of voting equipment across the United States. HAVA Mr. Andrew Regenscheid established the Election Assistance Commission (301) 975-5155 (EAC) and the Technical Guidelines Development andrew.regenenscheid@nist.gov Committee (TGDC), chaired by the Director of NIST. 30 HAVA directs NIST to provide technical support to the ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017Nationwide Public Safety Broadband be shared between public safety ofcials as each individual goes on and of duty. Furthermore, there will Network (NPSBN) Cybersecurity be a need for fexible distribution and credentialing of devices and users in situations where multiple public safety organizations are called into action. To facilitate ...P...S CR these needs NIST, through the NCCoE, piloted a proof-of-concept single sign on (SSO) for mobile applications on iOS and Android. t SECURITY Due to the vital nature of frst responder activities, the mobile applications that will serve public safety in their mission will require more scrutiny when Source: https://www.pscr.gov/ evaluated for software bugs and vulnerabilities than applications targeted at the public. In FY 2017, In February 2012, Congress passed the Middle NIST continued to expand its expertise in mobile Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act. One portion application vetting tools and practices. In addition of this legislation calls for the establishment of a to publishing NISTIR 8136, An Overview of Mobile nationwide, interoperable public-safety broadband Application Vetting Services for Public Safety, ACD, in network based on the 3rd Generation Partnership conjunction with NIST Software and System’s Division Project’s (3GPP) Long Term Evolution (LTE) (SSD), expanded the Static Analysis Tool Exposition technology. The network will be deployed and (SATE) to include mobile application analysis for the operated by the First Responder Network Authority frst time. This exposition seeks to improve methods (FirstNet). The planned Nationwide Public Safety for measuring the efectiveness of mobile application Broadband Network (NPSBN) will “create a much vetting tools. needed nationwide interoperable broadband network ITL continued to participate in the standards that will help police, frefghters, emergency medical development process for LTE technology within the service professionals and other public safety ofcials 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP), supporting stay safe and do their jobs” (see https://www.ntia. security requirements for public safety that are related doc.gov/category/public-safety). NIST is directed to to Proximity Services (ProSe), Group Communication conduct research and development that supports System Enablers (GCSE), and Mission Critical Push-To- the acceleration and advancement of the nationwide Talk (MCPTT). NIST also broadened its participation network. in 3GPP’s 5th Generation Mobile Networks (5G). In In FY 2017, CSD, ACD, and the NCCoE continued addition, researchers broadened their scope within to support the joint National Telecommunications the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) to include and Information Administration (NTIA) and NIST eforts related to public safety. Public Safety Communications Research (PSCR) In FY 2018, CSD and ACD will continue to program (see https://www.pscr.gov) with eforts in strengthen NIST’s relationship with both public public-safety mobile-application security, identity safety and commercial telecom stakeholders. Work management, data and application isolation concerning mobile application vetting and cyber technologies, wearable devices, and broadband security will continue to evolve as NIST refnes both standards. The PSCR’s Annual Public Safety Broadband its methods for tool evaluation as well as its corpus Stakeholder Conference, held in June 2017, continued of test cases used in those evaluations. PSCR is to be a valuable venue for ITL to provide updates on working diligently to fund grants and prize challenges each of our ongoing projects. The conference also to both solve current problems and fll future gaps provided a venue to directly interface with the public in public safety broadband technology. In FY 2018, safety and frst responder communities. ITL will also take on a crucial role in this work by The mobile devices that will operate on the NPSBN providing cybersecurity expertise and guidance in the 31 will be utilized in unique ways when compared to their administration of these awards. public counterparts. The same device(s) will likely NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017CONTACTS: The ICS cybersecurity team has used existing standards, in conjunction with the NIST Framework Mr. Michael Ogata Dr. Nelson Hastings for Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity, to (301) 975-6993 (301) 975-5237 develop a target profle for applying cybersecurity michael.ogata@nist.gov nelson.hastings@nist.gov protections within manufacturing environments. The development of this profle helps establish a roadmap Cybersecurity for Industrial Control for reducing cybersecurity risk for manufacturers Systems that is aligned with manufacturing sector goals and industry best practices. The profle tailors existing NIST’s Industrial Control System (ICS) cybersecurity control language to be more aligned cybersecurity efort is focused on providing guidance with operational technology environments, focusing and insights into the domain of securing connected on desired cybersecurity outcomes to identify physical systems. ACD is supporting the NIST opportunities for improving the current cybersecurity Engineering Laboratory’s (EL) efort to develop and posture of a manufacturing system. Through a session implement guidance aimed at efectively securing during the 2016 Cybersecurity Framework Workshop ICS, initially focusing on Smart Manufacturing and two public comment periods, the team solicited Environments. Using an ICS cybersecurity testbed, feedback from industry partners to help solidify the a portion of which is shown in Figure 8, NIST will content in the profle. The Cybersecurity Framework measure the network and operational performance of Manufacturing Profle was published as NISTIR 8183 these systems when instrumented with cybersecurity (see https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/ir/2017/NIST. protections, in accordance with the best practices IR.8183.pdf). and requirements prescribed by national and In 2018, NIST will continue the process of applying international standards and guidelines. Examples of the guidance presented in the Manufacturing Profle such standards and guidelines include International by implementing the recommended cybersecurity Society of Automation (ISA) standard ISA/IEC-62443 controls within the ICS cybersecurity testbed. and SP 800-82 Revision 2, Guide to Industrial Control This application of cybersecurity controls in an Systems (ICS) Security (see https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/ ICS environment will enable the measuring and nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.800-82r2.pdf). understanding of the network and operational Industrial Control Systems are an essential performance impacts that cybersecurity protections component in manufacturing environments. have on these systems. In addition to providing Increasing reliance on technology, communication, performance data, this project will produce and the interconnectivity of ICS and IT has expanded documentation relating to the implementation the potential vulnerabilities and increased the intricacies and special requirements presented by potential risk to manufacturing operations. While these non-traditional environments. these manufacturing systems become smarter and FOR MORE INFORMATION, SEE: increasingly connected, providing a tremendous increase in value and efciency, they also present https://www.nist.gov/itl/privacy-engineering a new challenge: “How is cybersecurity efectively CONTACTS: applied to this connected domain?” Mr. Jefrey Cichonski Mr. Keith Stoufer (EL) (301) 975-3293 (301) 975-3877 jefrey.cichonski@nist.gov keith.stoufer@nist.gov Smart Grid Cybersecurity In December 2007, Congress passed the Energy Independence and Security Act (EISA) that gave NIST a leading role in the coordination and acceleration of Figure 8: Collaborative robotics portion of the ICS 32 smart grid interoperability and security standards in cybersecurity testbed ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017collaboration with the private sector. The NIST Smart opportunities to collaborate with the National Grid program is led by the Engineering Laboratory Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) about smart (EL) with support from the Physical Measurement and grid cybersecurity. Information Technology Laboratories. The objective FOR MORE INFORMATION, SEE: of the program is to advance the measurement science that will increase asset utilization and https://www.nist.gov/engineering-laboratory/smart- efciency, improve grid reliability, and enable greater grid use of renewable energy sources in the grid through https://www.nist.gov/programs-projects/ research, standardization, testing and implementation cybersecurity-smart-grid-systems of the NIST Smart Grid Interoperability Framework. https://sepapower.org In the Spring of 2017, the Smart Grid Interoperability CONTACT: Panel (SGIP) merged with the Smart Electric Power Dr. Nelson Hastings Alliance (SEPA). SEPA’s Smart Grid Cybersecurity (301) 975-5237 Committee (SGCC) is led by an ITL representative. nelson.hastings@nist.gov The SGCC conducts regular outreach regarding cybersecurity issues related to the smart grid, including such topics as identity and key management. Examples of this outreach include bi-weekly calls and SOFTWARE ASSURANCE & support to the SEPA Grid Evolution Summit held on QUALITY July 25-27, 2017 in Washington, D.C., where the SGCC held its annual face-to-face meeting and included a presentation on the public key infrastructure by ACD’s Tim Polk. In addition to participating in SEPA’s SGCC, Outstanding computer security is based on CSD and ACD personnel are participating in SEPA’s software implementations that minimize the OpenFMB working groups to support cybersecurity existence of vulnerabilities. To develop processes capabilities. that deliver high-quality software, it is vital to be able to fnd, characterize, and categorize vulnerabilities, In FY 2017, researchers from ITL worked on weaknesses, and faults that appear in code. Processes defning a grid edge experiment to understand the can then be improved to preclude these faults, detect performance impact of cybersecurity capabilities them earlier, or build in mitigations for them. The on resource-constrained components of the grid. In NIST Software Assurance Metrics And Tool Evaluation addition, researchers explored how to leverage and (SAMATE) program promotes efective software incorporate cybersecurity risk management into assurance processes and also evaluates methods for the next version of the Smart Grid Interoperability automated tools to provide confdence that software Framework. ITL experts supported the Department is free from vulnerabilities. The SAMATE program has of Energy (DoE) Cyber Resilient Energy Delivery three primary components: the Software Assurance Consortium (CREDC) program by participating in their Reference Dataset (SARD), the Static Analysis Tool Annual Industry Workshop in Tempe, AZ and program Exposition (SATE), and the Bugs Framework (BF). peer review held in Washington, D.C. Through a grant to the University of New Hampshire, NIST supported SARD is a public repository of hundreds of research into adding security mechanisms to the IEEE thousands of computer programs with known security 1588 Precision Time Protocol (PTP). faws (see https://samate.nist.gov/SARD). The programs are primarily in fve computer languages, In FY 2018, ITL will continue to coordinate with EL C, C++, Java, PHP, and C#, and include synthetic test and the Smart Grid Program in the development of the cases (small programs written as tests), open-source next version of the NIST Smart Grid Interoperability production programs, and production programs with Framework 2.0 and in an execution of the grid edge vulnerabilities injected. See Figure 9 for a graph of the experiment on the NIST Smart Grid Testbed. ITL size, type, and languages of the test cases. This rich 33 will continue to chair SEPA’s SGCC and support the collection allows software developers to assess tools DoE CREDC program, and will look for and explore NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017and helps tool developers to refne their techniques. Research Projects Activity (IARPA), academia, and SARD includes contributions from government industry. In FY 2017, mobile applications and test organizations, such as the Defense Advanced cases used in former Static Analysis Tool Expositions Research Project Agency (DARPA), the National were added to SARD. Security Agency (NSA), the Intelligence Advanced SYN ~ ~ D Bar height is log number of test cases '? c::=::=ii PRO D (not to scale) ,oo~ INJ D C# Java  D ~ 0) m :::l nr:==7 0) PHP D Cm _J • C++ C • • • 5 10 100 1000 10000 100000 Number of lines of code Figure 9: Graph of Size, Type, and Languages Of Test Cases in SARD The sixth instance of SATE began in FY 2017. reports and publicly reported their experiences at a The SAMATE prepares test cases to measure the workshop. The purpose of SATE is to understand the strengths of tools in fnding source code that may state of technology and society’s justifed confdence lead to serious breaches. More than a dozen tool in software. SATE VI has three tracks: the classic track, makers will run their software analysis tools on these a track to assess mobile application vetting services, test cases. NIST researchers, aided by others in the and the Ockham track for sound analysis. For more software assurance community, analyzed the tool information, see https://samate.nist.gov/SATE.html. 34 ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017Just as the medical profession has vocabulary to 4. Faulty Operation (FOP)–integer overfow, precisely indicate anatomy, symptoms, and diseases, divide by zero, etc.; the BF seeks to improve the science of secure software 5. Memory Allocation (MAL)–double free, by providing orthogonal, unambiguous language for use after free, etc.; software professionals. The BF comprises classes of software faults, including their attributes, causes, and 6. Encryption (ENC)–including decryption, consequences. Figure 10 illustrates the causal graph for bufer overfow (BOF) faults. FY 2017 updates 7. Verifcation (VRF), and include eight classes (including three cryptography 8. Key Management (KMN). classes): Defnitions, examples, and causal graphs of these 1. Injection (INJ)–SQL, OS, etc.; classes and links to publications are available at 2. Control of Interaction Frequency (CIF); https://samate.nist.gov/BF. 3. Bufer Overfow (BOF); CAUSES ATTRIBUTES CONSEQUENCES Access: ✓ Read ✓Write Incorrect Results Boundary: ✓ Below ✓ Above Program Crash ARC Location: ✓ Heap Result Fault: ✓ Stack System Crash ✓ Overflow Magnitude: ✓ Underflow ✓ Small ✓ Undefined ✓ Moderate r::'\ ✓ Truncation ✓ Far Operator: Data Size: ~ Operand Error: ✓ Little Types: ✓ Some ✓ Huge Excursion: ✓ Continuous ACI ✓ Discrete Incorrect Conversion Figure 10: Causal Graph for Bufer Overfow CONTACT: Dr. Paul E. Black (301) 975-4794 paul.black@nist.goV 35 NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017FEDERAL CYBERSECURITY S&T Education and Research (FASTER) Community of Practice (CoP). Barry I. Schneider is co-chair of RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT High End Computing (HEC) IWG. Chris Greer and Al (R&D) Wavering from NIST’s Engineering Laboratory co- chair NITRD’s Cyber Physical Systems (CPS) IWG and the High Confdence Software and Systems (HCSS) IWG, respectively. Networking and Information Technology Research and Development (NITRD) program Tim Polk is the principal NIST participant in the bi- provides a framework in which many federal agencies weekly coordination activities of the federal Special come together to coordinate their networking and Cyber Operations Research and Engineering (SCORE) IT research and development (R&D) eforts. NIST Committee. SCORE enables technology transfer remained committed to the value of communicating through the sharing of NIST cybersecurity expertise its R&D eforts to other federal colleagues and and publications with researchers throughout the identifying the opportunities to support R&D eforts Federal Government. The SCORE committee interacts throughout the Federal Government. with federal leaders and reports to the National Science and Technology Council’s Committee on NIST is a consistent presence at the monthly Homeland and National Security. cybersecurity meetings with Bill Newhouse, National Cybersecurity Center of Excellence (NCCoE) Security All the NIST leaders for interagency coordination Engineer and the National Initiative for Cybersecurity leverage these working groups and committees to Education (NICE) Deputy Director, as the co-chair communicate powerfully about NIST’s research, of the Cyber Security and Information Assurance frameworks, and publications and bring back insights Interagency Working Group (CSIA IWG). During and activities relevant to NIST’s work. FY 2017, NIST provided updates to the CSIA IWG describing the updates to the NIST Cybersecurity FOR MORE INFORMATION, SEE: Framework, SP 800-53, Security and Privacy Controls https://www.nitrd.gov for Information Systems and Organizations, and the CONTACT: NICE program. Mr. Bill Newhouse Naomi Lefkowitz, Senior Privacy Policy Advisor (301) 975-0232 at NIST, co-chairs the Privacy R&D IWG, which william.newhouse@nist.gov coordinates the multidisciplinary research and development conducted by NITRD agencies that seek to produce knowledge and technologies that identify and mitigate emerging risks to our privacy, and that COMPUTER FORENSICS enables individuals, companies, and the government to beneft from technological advancements while being able to efectively balance the resulting benefts with resulting risks to privacy. The activity involves Digital evidence includes software, hardware, research into and development of methods for and data on computers and mobile devices (e.g., characterizing privacy expectations, understanding audio, video, and image fles). Digital evidence can privacy violations, engineering privacy-protecting be a part of investigating most crimes, since material systems, recovering from privacy violations, and the relevant to the crime may be recorded in digital form. impact of privacy on public policy and of public policy Methods for securely acquiring, storing and analyzing on privacy. digital evidence quickly and efciently are critical. ITL promotes the efcient and efective use of computer Ram Sriram is the co-chair of NITRD’s Software technology to investigate crimes. The project team Productivity, Sustainability, and Quality (SPSQ) develops tools for testing computer forensic software, Interagency Working Group (IWG). Robert B. Bohn including test criteria and test sets. ITL also maintains 36 is the co-chair of NITRD’s Faster Administration of the National Software Reference Library (NSRL) – a ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017vast archive of published software applications that is Tool Testing (CFTT) project at NIST is to establish an important resource for both criminal investigators a methodology for testing computer forensic and historians. software tools by the development of general tool specifcations, test procedures, test criteria, test sets, and test hardware. The project is intended to provide the information necessary for toolmakers to improve tools, for users to make informed choices about acquiring and using computer forensics tools, and for interested parties to understand the capabilities of the tools. The project team’s approach for testing computer forensic tools is based on well-recognized National Software Reference Library international methodologies for conformance testing The NSRL is designed to collect software and quality testing that ensures that forensic software from various sources and incorporate fle profles tools consistently produce accurate and objective test computed from this software into a Reference Data results. Set (RDS) of information. The RDS can be used by law In FY 2016, the CFTT project expanded to allow enforcement, government, and industry organizations forensics testers to use the NIST testing methodology to review fles on a computer by matching fle profles in their own labs and to produce standardized test in the RDS. This will help alleviate much of the efort reports for disk imaging forensic tools. In FY 2017, involved in determining which fles are important as federated testing was further expanded with three evidence on computers or fle systems that have been major updates: a revision to disk-imaging testing, the seized as part of criminal investigations. The NSRL addition of mobile device tool testing and hardware also provides a research environment to promote the write-blocker testing. In FY 2018, the project will be development of new forensics techniques and other expanded to support string searching and forensic applications in computer science. media preparation. The forensic community is The RDS continues to be the premier software beginning to use federated testing to test tools and resource and, in FY 2017, the NSRL published four share test reports. The CFTT project also maintains the releases. There are currently 23,000 microcomputer Forensics Tool Catalog and the Computer Forensics applications and 160,000 mobile device applications Reference Data Sets (CFReDS). The Tool Catalog yielding a combined total of 326 million fles. In FY website is a community-sourced catalog of forensic 2017, the NSRL was expanded to include mobile tools aided by a taxonomy of forensic tools. The Tool applications and to include the profles obtained from Catalog grew by 17 tools in FY 2017. The CFReDS data installing and exercising applications. sets are used in a variety of settings, such as university classes, to try out forensics tools on known data. FOR MORE INFORMATION, SEE: https://www.nsrl.nist.gov, https://toolcatalog.nist.gov, https://www.cfreds.nist.gov. and https://www.cftt.nist.gov CONTACTS: Mr. Doug White Dr. Jim Lyle Computer Forensics Tool Testing Project (301) 975-4761 (301) 975-3270 doug.white@nist.gov james.lyle@nist.gov There is a critical need in the law enforcement community to ensure the reliability of computer 37 forensic tools. The goal of the Computer Forensic NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017OPERATE OVERSEE PROTECT COLLECT SECURELY AND AND AND ANALYZE AND INVESTIGATE PROVISION MAINTAIN GOVERN DEFEND OPERATE Figure 11: The Seven Categories of the NICE Framework CYBERSECURITY AWARENESS, In support of goal 3, NICE published SP 800-181, The NICE Framework, in August 2017 (see https:// TRAINING, EDUCATION, AND nist.gov/nice/framework). The NICE Framework OUTREACH establishes a taxonomy and common lexicon that is to be used to describe all cybersecurity work and workers, irrespective of where or for whom the work National Initiative for Cybersecurity is performed. Figure 11 shows the seven categories of the NICE Framework. These categories further break Education (NICE) down into Specialty Areas, Work Roles, Tasks, and Since 2010 NIST’s National Initiative for Knowledge, Skills, and Abilities (KSAs). Cybersecurity Education (NICE) seeks to foster, energize, and promote a robust network and an integrated ecosystem of cybersecurity education, training, and workforce development. NICE has been focusing on eforts to achieve this by aligning to three goals: 1) accelerate learning and skills development, 2) nurture a diverse learning community, and 3) guide career development and workforce planning. In support of goal 1, in November 2016, CyberSeek was launched to provide a visualization of the demand for and supply of cybersecurity workers across the nation (see http://cyberseek.org). At its launch, the tool also provided a visualization of career pathways in cybersecurity. The data from this tool, in part, has helped NICE develop an executive overview Figure 12: Clarence Williams, Lead for Government white paper on Cybersecurity Workforce Demand. In Engagement at NICE, and Rodney Petersen, FY 2017, NICE also supported goal one through the Director of NICE, speak with an attendee at the development of a paper regarding Cybersecurity CyberSecureGov Conference in Washington, D.C. Apprenticeships. This report and other white papers developed by NICE authors are available at https:// NICE continued its coordination with academic, www.nist.gov/itl/applied-cybersecurity/nice/ industry and government partners throughout the resources/one-pagers. year at various meetings, workshops and events. In August 2017, NICE held a workshop in Chicago, Illinois. In support of goal 2, NICE hosted a Veterans in This workshop, along with a Request for Information Cybersecurity Workshop in March 2017. This workshop that NICE issued, provided information to inform convened approximately 40 representatives of federal work and to prepare a report to the President on the and state government, branches of the military, fndings and recommendations about supporting the industry, and workforce development organizations growth and sustainment of the nation’s cybersecurity to explore issues, discuss initiatives and better workforce in the public and private sectors. understand the gaps that exist in helping our veterans transition to careers in cybersecurity. 38 ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017In FY 2018, NICE will continue to promote and organized around several primary content types to coordinate annual NICE activities such as the NICE make information easier to fnd and maintain: projects, Quarterly eNewsletter; the NICE Webinar Series; the publications, news, events and presentations. A new NICE Conference to be held on November 7-8, 2017 taxonomy of topics is used to tag content site-wide, in Dayton, Ohio; and the NICE K-12 Cybersecurity and an online, searchable glossary of information Education Conference to be held December 4-5, 2017 security terminology expands on the terms identifed in Nashville, Tennessee. NICE will also kick of the in NISTIR 7298 Revision 2. One of the most noticeable frst annual National Cybersecurity Career Awareness changes is a vastly improved publications section, in Week on November 13-18, 2017 to focus local, terms of content, searchability, and browsing. At the regional, and national interest to inspire, educate, and end of FY 2017, the site provided detailed information engage children through adults to pursue careers in about more than 1,200 of NIST’s current and historical cybersecurity. information security publications. FOR MORE INFORMATION, SEE: The CSRC Redesign Team designed the site’s architecture and interface to signifcantly improve https://www.nist.gov/itl/applied-cybersecurity/nice site navigation, search, and the ability of ITL staf to CONTACTS: maintain and contribute content. The site also uses responsive design to greatly improve CSRC’s usability Mr. Rodney Petersen Ms. Danielle Santos on mobile devices. More than 21,000 individual (301) 975-8897 (301) 975-5048 content items were transferred from the legacy site, rodney@nist.gov danielle.santos@nist.gov and in February 2017, ITL successfully launched a beta version of the new site. Feedback from beta- Computer Security Resource Center site users over seven months was incorporated by the CSRC Redesign Team to fx bugs, implement (CSRC) enhancements, and refne the site’s look and feel. The For more than 20 years, the CSRC website has team considered all comments it received, and made provided stakeholders with signifcant information every efort to implement those suggestions. After about ITL’s cybersecurity research and testing making signifcant, gradual improvements to the beta programs. Consistently one of the most-visited site, NIST launched the new CSRC on September 18, websites at NIST, CSRC is used by several ITL 2017, while simultaneously retiring the legacy site. divisions to communicate information about NIST’s In FY 2018, the CSRC Redesign Team will continue cybersecurity and privacy programs and projects, to enhance the content, functionality and usability of research, validation testing, software tools, and other the new site, striving to provide a better and more areas of interest to NIST’s customers in government, useful experience to site users. industry, academia and elsewhere, both within the U.S. and globally. The CSRC team maintains an email subscription list with more than 78,000 subscribers worldwide. The CSRC website serves as a primary NIST Subscribers receive notifcations when news updates, repository of cybersecurity and privacy standards, event details, and publication information—including guidelines, and technical documents. Refer to the the release of draft publications for public comment— Publications Released in FY 2017 section of this are posted to CSRC. To review the available lists annual report for details about the ITL Cybersecurity and subscribe, visit https://csrc.nist.gov/ and in the Program’s publications released in FY 2017. page footer click either the envelope icon or the CSRC’s most signifcant event occurred in “Subscribe to CSRC Updates” link. Additional NIST/ITL September 2017, with the launch of a completely Cybersecurity topics are available including: Federal redesigned, content management system-based Information Security Management Act (FISMA) news; website. In addition to aligning with the main NIST Cybersecurity Framework; National Initiative for website’s look and feel, the new CSRC website is Cybersecurity Education (NICE); ITL’s Trusted Identity 39 Group (TIG), and several lists for the NCCoE. NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017FOR MORE INFORMATION, SEE: The Forum conducts quarterly meetings and an annual two-day conference for a discussion of current https://csrc.nist.gov issues and topics of interest to those responsible for CONTACTS: supporting the information security programs of federal agencies. Questions regarding the CSRC website can be sent to the CSRC Webmasters at: Discussion topics at the quarterly FCSM meetings webmaster-csrc@nist.gov in FY 2017 included briefngs on: Mr. Patrick O’Reilly Ms. Nicole Keller • The National Cybersecurity Center of (301) 975-4751 (301) 975-3648 Excellence (NCCoE) - Federally Funded patrick.oreilly@nist.gov nicole.keller@nist.gov Research and Development Center (FFRDC), • Developing an information security continuous Federal Computer Security Managers’ monitoring (ISCM) Assessment Methodology, (FCSM) Forum • Security Automation and Continuous The Federal Computer Security Managers’ Forum Monitoring, (the Forum) is sponsored by NIST to promote the • Demonstration of a Continuous Diagnostic sharing of security-related information among federal Monitoring Instance, agencies. The Forum, which serves more than 1,000 members, strives to provide an ongoing opportunity • Guidance for Assigning New Cybersecurity for managers of federal information security Codes to Positions with IT/Cybersecurity/ programs to exchange information security materials Cyber-related Functions and the New in a timely manner, build upon the experiences of Cybercareers.gov Site, other programs, and to reduce possible duplication of eforts. It provides a mechanism for NIST to share • Using Risk Management to Improve Privacy in information directly with federal agency information Federal Systems, security managers in fulfllment of NIST’s leadership • National Cybersecurity and Communications mandate under FISMA. The Forum also assists NIST Integration Center (NCCIC) 101, and in establishing and maintaining relationships with other individuals and organizations that are actively • Creating a Cybersecurity Scorecard for a addressing information security issues within the Federal Agency. Federal Government. During FY 2017, CSD’s Victoria Pillitteri and Jody Jacobs served as Co-Chairs, and FY 2017’s annual two-day meeting was held at Peggy Himes from ACD served as the Secretariat of NIST on June 20-21, 2017 with over 220 attendees. the Forum, providing administrative and logistical Presentations included the current technical, support. Additionally, during FY 2017, the FCSM operational and management information systems webpage was signifcantly restructured and updated security topics and updates on the information to ensure that presentation information, both current system security activities of OMB, General Services and archived, is delivered as efciently and efectively Administration (GSA), Department of Homeland as possible. Security (DHS), Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), NARA, Internal Revenue Service (IRS), The Forum maintains an extensive email National Weather Service (NOAA), Ofce of Personnel subscription service/listserv. Participation in the Management (OPM), and NIST. A frst ever “ask the service is restricted to those Federal and State experts” panel was held where attendees could ask Government employees and their designated support subject matter experts on security, privacy, and contractors with a role in the management of their procurement-related questions. Most presentations organization’s information system security program. from the two-day ofsite and monthly meetings are The email listserv ofers an open forum for information available online (see https://csrc.nist.gov/Projects/ 40 sharing of best practices and recommendations, and Forum/Archived-Events-and-Presentations). serves as a resource for this community of interest. ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017The following is a list of presentations that were Federal Information Systems Security given at the annual two-day meeting: Educators’ Association (FISSEA) • Overview of SP 800-184, Guide for The Federal Information Systems Security Cybersecurity Event Recovery Educators’ Association (FISSEA), founded in 1987, is • FedRAMP Tailored an organization hosted by NIST for information system security professionals to assist federal agencies in • Overview of the Software Quality Assurance meeting their information system’s security awareness, Project and Software Assurance Marketplace training, and education responsibilities. FISSEA strives to elevate the general level of information system • Applying the Cybersecurity Framework in security knowledge for the Federal Government Federal Agencies: Presentation and Panel and the federal workforce. It also seeks to assist the Discussion professional development of its members. • Top Down vs. Bottom Up Governance of Risk, FISSEA membership is open to information system What’s Best? security professionals, professional trainers and • Cybersecurity Dashboard on a Shoestring educators, and managers responsible for information Budget system security training programs in federal agencies, as well as contractors of these agencies and faculty • High Vulnerability Asset Overlay members of accredited educational institutions who are involved in information security training and • Pushing Computers to the Edge: Next education. Willingness to share products, information, Generation Security and Privacy Controls for and experiences is all that is required to become a Systems and IoT Devices FISSEA member. A working group meets monthly to • Infusing Cybersecurity into the Government administer business activities. Acquisition Process FISSEA maintains a website and a mailing list, and • Government Accountability Ofce Update participates in a social networking site as a means of communication for its members. CSD assists FISSEA • “Ask the Experts” Panel with its operations by providing staf support for several of its activities and by being FISSEA’s host • NIST Interagency Report 8011, Automation agency. Support for Security Control Assessments The 30th Annual FISSEA Conference occurred on The Forum plays a valuable role in helping NIST June 19, 2017 at NIST. The FISSEA audience included and other federal agencies develop and maintain managers responsible for information systems a strong, proactive stance in the identifcation and security awareness, training, certifcations, workforce resolution of new strategic and tactical IT security identifcation, compliance, etc. in federal agencies; issues as they emerge. The email list of interested contractors providing awareness and training support; parties has steadily increased in size and provides and faculty members of accredited educational a valuable resource for Federal and State security institutions who are involved in information security program managers. training and education. Clarence Williams, Peggy FOR MORE INFORMATION, SEE: Himes, Gretchen Morris (DB Consulting Group/NASA), and other members of the FISSEA Working Group, https://csrc.nist.gov/Projects/Forum were integral to the efort to support the conference. CONTACTS: This year’s theme was “Securing the Future to Ms. Victoria Pillitteri Ms. Jody Jacobs Infnity and Beyond: Improving Cybersecurity through (301) 975-8542 (301) 975-4728 Awareness, Training, and Education”. Attendees victoria.pillitteri@nist.gov jody.jacobs@nist.gov gained new techniques for developing/conducting 41 training, cost-efective practices, considerations for NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017compliance, and free resources and contacts. Over Rosenberg, Andrew Ellis, John Ippolito, & Sam 150 cybersecurity training professionals attended the Carter, Native Intelligence, Inc. and Friends one-day conference. • Website: The Security Training and Awareness NIST’s ITL Director, Charles Romine, welcomed Program Team, Employment and Social attendees to the event. FISSEA Lifetime Member, Development Canada (ESDC). Louis Numkin, provided a historical timeline of • Motivational Item: K Rudolph, Native FISSEA, recognizing 30 years of providing a platform Intelligence, Inc. for security specialists to collaborate, network, and learn. • Newsletter: IHS Policy & Security Awareness Team, Indian Health Service Presenters represented NIST, DHS, DoD, HHS, private industry, and academia. Attendees had an • Security Training Scenarios: Division of opportunity to share about their specifc awareness Information Security; Policy & Security and training programs throughout the conference. Awareness Team, Ofce of Information Technology, Indian Health Service The FISSEA Educator of the Year Award was established to recognize and honor a contemporary • Video: Rita John, John Creery, Chelsea O’Hara, who is making special eforts to create, build, manage, Nellie MacNeil, Kyle Bachan, Tim Herman, or inspire an information systems security awareness, Rosanne Trudel, & Sapna Kalhan, IFDS Canada training, or education program. Gretchen Morris, 2015 FISSEA Educator of the Year, presented the 2016 Publicly available YouTube video Uniform Resource FISSEA Educator of the Year Award to Professor Locator (URL): https://youtu.be/KBJCO6F4r2g Sushil Jajodia of George Mason University. Mrs. Morris Peer’s Choice Awards (selected by peers during shared Mr. Jajodia’s contributions to the cybersecurity the conference): education industry by characterizing his contributions in three ways: as an educationist, a researcher, and a • Poster: K Rudolph, G. Mark Hardy, Niomi thought leader. Professor Jajodia was presented with Rosenberg, Andrew Ellis, John Ippolito, & Sam a plaque as recognition of his achievements in the Carter, Native Intelligence, Inc. and Friends security community. • Website: Valerie Hayward, InfoSight, Inc. Other traditional FISSEA conference events included announcing the winners of the FISSEA • Motivational Item: K Rudolph, Native security contest. The FISSEA Security Awareness, Intelligence, Inc. Training & Education Contest includes fve categories • Newsletter: Kim Brumley, Margaret from one of FISSEA’s three key areas of Awareness, McDermott, Hiyan Sisson & Robert Training, and Education. A winner is selected from each Cunningham, Department of Veterans Afairs category and awarded a certifcate. The categories include: (1) an awareness poster; (2) an awareness • Security Training Scenarios: K Rudolph, website; (3) a motivational item (e.g., trinkets, pens, Niomi Rosenberg & Sam Carter, Native stress relief items and t-shirts); (4) an awareness Intelligence, Inc. and Friends newsletter; (5) an interactive scenario/exercise; and (6) an awareness video • Video: TIE Rita John, John Creery, Chelsea O’Hara, Nellie MacNeil, Kyle Bachan, 2017 FISSEA Awareness, Training, and Education Tim Herman, Rosanne Trudel, & Sapna Contest Winners Kalhan, IFDS Canada and Cheryl Seaman & Stephanie Erickson, The National Institutes of Awarded Certifcates at the Conference (selected Health by an impartial judging committee prior to the conference): 42 • Poster: K Rudolph, G. Mark Hardy, Niomi ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017FISSEA attendees have reported that social safeguard issues related to information security interaction and networking at the conference are and privacy. The Board was originally created by benefcial. The conference continues to be a valuable the Computer Security Act of 1987 (P.L. 100-235) forum for individuals from government, industry, as the Computer System Security and Privacy and academia who are involved with developing, Advisory Board (CSSPAB) within the Department of maintaining, and/or supporting security programs. Commerce. The CSSPAB was chartered in May 1988 in Attendees gain insights regarding information security accordance with the Federal Advisory Committee Act, awareness, training, education, certifcation, and as amended. The 2002 FISMA legislation amended professionalization. Attendees also learn of ongoing the statutory authority of the Board and provided its and planned training and education programs and current name. cybersecurity initiatives. The conference provides The duties of the Board, as stipulated in FISMA, NIST with the opportunity to provide assistance to include: departments and agencies as they work to meet their FISMA responsibilities. The FISSEA website provides • Identifcation of emerging managerial, links to the conference program and presentations technical, administrative, and physical (seehttps://csrc.nist.gov/Projects/Federal-Info safeguard issues relative to information Systems-Security-Educators-Assoc.) security and privacy; The next conference will be held at NIST on March • Advising NIST, DHS and the Director of the 14-15, 2018. OMB on information security and privacy issues pertaining to Federal Government FOR MORE INFORMATION, SEE: information systems (including the thorough https://csrc.nist.gov/Projects/Federal-Info-Sys- review of proposed standards and guidelines tems-Security-Educators-Assoc developed under 15 U.S.C. 278g-3 - Computer Standards Program); and CONTACTS: Mr. Clarence Williams Ms. Rae’chell Finch • Annually reporting its fndings to the (240) 672-8723 (202) 482-0935 Secretary of Commerce, the Director of the clarence.williams@nist.gov raechell.fnch@nist.gov OMB, the Director of NSA, and the appropriate committees of Congress. Information Security and Privacy Congress indicated the long-term need for the Advisory Board (ISPAB) Board by setting the term of Board members to four years. The charter requires that the NIST Director Since the inception of this Advisory Board in 1987, appoint the Chairperson and all 12 members of the the Information Security and Privacy Advisory Board Board. They are selected for their preeminence in the (ISPAB) has successfully renewed its charter with information technology industry or related disciplines. proper authority every two years. The Board plays a central and unique role in providing the government The charter stipulates that Board members with expert advice concerning information security be selected from three main categories, with each and privacy issues that may afect federal information category providing four members. Category 1 includes systems. Title III of the E-Government Act of 2002 members from outside the Federal Government who reafrmed the need for this Board by giving it an are eminent in the information technology industry, additional responsibility: to thoroughly review all at least one of whom is a representative of small of the proposed information technology standards or medium-sized companies in such industries. and guidelines developed under Section 20 of the Category 2 also includes members from outside the National Institute of Standards and Technology Act Federal Government who are eminent in the feld (15 U.S. Code (U.S.C.) 278g-3), as amended. of information technology or related disciplines, but who are not employed by or representative of a The ISPAB is a federal advisory committee with 43 producer of information. Category 3 includes those specifc statutory objectives to identify emerging from the Federal Government who are experienced managerial, technical, administrative, and physical NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017in information system management, including those • Updates of other critical NIST publications. with experience in information security and privacy, In aligning with the work-plan focus areas, the at least one of whom should be from the National Board expanded its work to include the following: Security Agency. The diversity of these categories helps the Board to meet its statutory objectives. • Acquisition, Supply Chain Security, and Open Federal members bring a detailed understanding Source trustworthy software; of the federal processing environment; industry brings concerns and experiences regarding product • Mobile Devices and the Protection of Sensitive development and market formation, while private Information; computer security experts are able to bring their • Machine Learning and Artifcial Intelligence; experiences of commercial cost-efective security measures into Board discussions. • The NIST Cybersecurity Framework; Chris Boyer is currently the Chair of ISPAB. Mr. • The Federal Information Security Management Boyer, the Assistant Vice President for Global Public Act (FISMA); Policy at AT&T, joined the Board in 2012 and assumed the responsibilities of the Chair in January 2016 (see • Emerging Technologies; and list of Board members https://csrc.nist.gov/Projects/ ISPAB/Members). • The National Cybersecurity Center of Excellence (NCCoE). During FY 2017, ISPAB held three meetings, all in Washington, D.C.: The presenters at each Board meeting were leaders and experts representing private industry, • June 28-30, 2017; academia, federal agency Chief Information Ofcers (CIOs), Inspector Generals (IGs) and Chief Information • March 29-31, 2017; and Security Ofcers (CISOs). • October 26-28, 2016. Copies of the current list of members and their In keeping with previous practices at the frst biographies, the Board’s charter and past Board meeting of each fscal year, the Board established a activities are located at https://csrc.nist.gov/Projects/ work plan for FY 2017. The resulting plan included the ISPAB. Information on ISPAB meetings is published in following areas of focus: Federal Register Notices at least 16 days prior to the meeting. Those interested in receiving meeting notices • Cryptography, and specifcally NIST R&D; and other notices relating to NIST work in information security and privacy may email their name, afliation, • Metrics – success measures for security and and address to Matthew Scholl at the address below. privacy; FOR MORE INFORMATION, SEE: • Trust in NIST (accountability and success); https://csrc.nist.gov/Projects/ISPAB • Quantum-resistant encryption; CONTACT: • Identity management; Mr. Matthew Scholl (301) 975-2941 • Privacy engineering; matthew.scholl@nist.gov • FISMA – Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation (CDM) and Federal Risk and Small and Medium Size Business Authorization Management Program (SMB) Cybersecurity Outreach (FedRAMP); Program • High-Value Asset cybersecurity; Small- and medium-sized businesses (SMBs)— 44 • Cybersecurity; and representing approximately 95% of all businesses— ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017are the backbone of the U.S. economy. SMBs cannot FOR MORE INFORMATION, SEE: always justify an extensive security program or even https://www.nist.gov/programs-projects/small-busi- full-time staf devoted to information security. Faced ness-corner-sbc with limited resources and budgets, SMBs need practical solutions and training that enable them to CONTACTS: cost-efectively address their cybersecurity risks. NIST Email: smallbizsecurity@nist.gov has partnered with other federal agencies and public- Dr. Nelson Hastings Ms. Marian Merritt private organizations to help address these needs. (301) 975-5237 (240) 338-2033 During FY 2017, the Small Business Outreach nelson.hastings@nist.gov marian.merritt@nist.gov Program accomplished the following: Mr. Jef Marron Mr. Matthew Barrett • Partnered with other federal agencies to (301) 975-3846 (301) 975-3267 catalog and evaluate existing cybersecurity jefrey.marron@nist.gov matthew.barrett@nist.gov educational materials designed for SMB use; • Collaborated with federal partners, led by the Small Business Administration (SBA) and the CRYPTOGRAPHIC STANDARDS Department of Homeland Security (DHS), on the development of the Small Business PROGRAM Development Center Cyber Strategy; • Reviewed available SMB training programs Cryptographic Hash Algorithms from federal partners and the National Cyber Security Alliance (NCSA); Cryptographic hash functions, which transform • Evaluated existing NIST SMB-focused arbitrarily long input data into a fxed-length output, educational materials such as reports, are a fundamental tool for information security, e.g., presentations, and online content; digital signatures, pseudorandom functions, and key derivation. • Updated the Small Business Corner website to refect program updates and simplify SMB NIST has standardized two families of Secure contact with NIST; Hash Algorithms (SHA): SHA-1 and SHA-2 in Federal Information Processing Standard (FIPS) 180, and • Initiated the development of the NIST SHA-3 in FIPS 202. strategic plan for small business outreach, refecting requirements in new Congressional The SHA-1 function—which was published in the legislation; and original version of FIPS 180 in 1995, and which is still specifed along with the SHA-2 family in FIPS 180-4— • Published Revision 1 of NISTIR 7621, has been deprecated for many years, because it could Small Business Information Security: The no longer be relied upon to provide the important Fundamentals. This publication presents property of “collision resistance.” In fact, in 2017 a cybersecurity fundamentals for SMBs in SHA-1 collision (diferent inputs with the same output) straightforward, non-technical language (see was published by researchers at Centrum Wiskunde https://www.nist.gov/publications/small- & Informatica (CWI) Institute of Amsterdam and business-information-security-fundamentals). Google, based on the seminal cryptanalysis in 2005 In FY 2018, the Small Business Outreach Program by Xiaoyun Wang of Shandong University. will continue to collaborate with federal and other partners to understand the cybersecurity needs of Wang’s research was the main impetus to the SMBs and identify and/or develop materials and development of SHA-3 through a public competition, 45 training to meet those needs. which NIST initiated in 2007. The winning algorithm, KECCAK, was chosen in part because its components NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017could easily be adapted to provide a variety of Triple Data Encryption Algorithm functionalities. (TDEA) FIPS 202 realized some of this potential by SP 800-67: Recommendation for the Triple Data including two eXtendable Output Functions (XOFs), Encryption Algorithm (TDEA) Block Cipher: which allow variable-length outputs, in addition to its four hash functions. The two XOFs are called SHAKE128 The TDEA algorithm is specifed in SP 800-67 and SHAKE256; the numerical sufx indicates the Revision 1. This publication includes a specifcation of supported security strength. FIPS 202 also supports the Data Encryption Algorithm (DEA) engine that was a fexible scheme for “domain separation” between originally specifed in FIPS 46, The Data Encryption diferent functions, which ensures that diferent Standard, in 1977 and was withdrawn as an approved named functions will produce unrelated outputs. algorithm in 2005. In December 2016, NIST further expanded the A security analysis and practical demonstration uses of KECCAK with the publication SP 800-185, SHA- of attacks on TDEA in several real-world protocols 3 Derived Functions: cSHAKE, KMAC, TupleHash and was posted in FY 2017 by Karthikeyan Bhargavan ParallelHash. It provides four new types of functions, and Gaëtan Leurent of Inria (Paris) and is available at as indicated in the title, each with the same two https://sweet32.info/. This article provides evidence supported security strengths: that the collision attack on TDEA represents a serious security vulnerability for many common uses of • cSHAKE128 and cSHAKE256 are XOFs that these protocols — including the Hyper Text Transfer can be “customized” for individual users or Protocol Secure (HTTPS) protocol for secure Internet applications, so that their outputs would be connections. Moreover, the analysis shows that the unrelated to any other SHAKE variants; security vulnerability remains serious unless more stringent limits are imposed on the amount of data • KMAC128 and KMAC256 are keyed-hash that can be encrypted under a single three-key bundle functions with variable-length outputs, i.e., than the current data limit recommended by NIST in pseudorandom functions (PRFs); SP 800-67, Revision 1. • TupleHash128 and TupleHash256 are hash In response to this article, NIST posted a notice functions on tuples of input strings; and announcing plans to reduce the maximum amount • ParallelHash128 and ParallelHash256 are hash of plaintext allowed to be encrypted under a single functions that can exploit parallel processing TDEA three-key bundle from 232 to 220 (64-bit) blocks, to efciently hash long messages. and to revise SP 800-67 accordingly. In addition, NIST plans to disallow TDEA for TLS, IPsec and possibly NIST is currently considering the development other protocols (see https://csrc.nist.gov/News/2017/ of a parallelizable hashing mode and XOF mode for Update-to-Current-Use-and-Deprecation-of-TDEA generic hash functions (e.g., SHA-2). These modes for the announcement). would allow the SHA-2 family to achieve some of the functionality of the SHA-3 family. In late FY 2017, a revision of SP 800-67 was provided for public comment that included the above FOR MORE INFORMATION, SEE: restriction on the usage of TDEA for each three-key https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/hash-functions/ TDEA key bundle. SP 800-67 Rev 2 will be published sha-3-standardization in early FY 2018. CONTACT: CONTACT: Dr. Morrie Dworkin Ms. Elaine Barker (301) 975-2354 (301) 975-2911 morris.dworkin@nist.gov elaine.barker@nist.gov 46 (Editors’ Note: Ms. Shu-jen Chang supported this program until her recent retirement) ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017Random Bit Generation In Figure 13, the noise source contains the entropy- providing activity (e.g., the output of ring oscillators); Random bits are required for the secure use if the activity being sampled does not produce binary of most cryptographic algorithms. For example, data, then the noise source includes a digitization random bits are used to generate the keys needed process. Health tests are intended to detect whether for encryption and digital signature applications. the noise source and the entropy source (as a whole) CSD began work on the specifcation of random continues to operate as expected. The optional bit generators in the late 1990s. Information on the conditioning component is responsible for reducing Random Bit Generation project is available at https:// bias and/or increasing the entropy rate of the bits to csrc.nist.gov/projects/random-bit-generation. eventually be output by the entropy source. This project consists of the development of SP 800-90B includes descriptions of the tests for three NIST Special Publications (SPs). SP 800-90A, NIST’s Cryptographic Algorithm Validation Program Recommendation for Random Number Generation (CAVP) and Cryptographic Module Validation Program Using Deterministic Random Bit Generators, was (CMVP) to validate candidate entropy sources. During initially published in 2007 and last revised in 2015. It FY 2017, CSD fnalized the test descriptions for the specifes several deterministic algorithms that can initial publication of SP 800-90B, which is expected be used for the generation of pseudorandom bits – to be published in early FY 2018. CSD will begin a a sequence of bits produced by an algorithm, rather revision of the document in FY 2018 to address issues than a random physical phenomenon that produces a that were not included in the initial version of the truly random sequence. Two additional documents (SP document and any lessons learned during validation 800-90B and SP 800-90C) are under development, testing by the CAVP and CMVP labs. and the latest drafts were made available for public The initial version of SP 800-90B will be available comment in 2016 via the Special Publications page: via the Special Publications page: https://csrc.nist. https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/PubsSPs.html. gov/publications/PubsSPs.html. SP 800-90B, Recommendation for the In May 2017, a presentation “A Tale of Two Entropy Entropy Sources Used for Random Bit Generation, Source Validation Approaches: NIST 800 90B vs. addresses the development and testing of entropy BSI AIS 31” was provided by Meltem Sönmez Turan sources. Figure 13 illustrates the model that the at the ICMC17 International Cryptographic Module Recommendation uses to describe an entropy source Conference held in Washington D.C. and its components: a noise source, health tests, and an optional conditioning component. SP 800-90C, Recommendation for Random Bit Generator (RBG) Constructions, provides basic guidance on the construction of Random Bit Generators (RBGs) from the entropy sources validated against the requirements of SP 800-90B and the Deterministic Random Bit Generators (DRBG) Digital Noise algorithms of SP 800-90A. SP 800-90C includes c__ ____ ---1------------" Source constructions for both non-deterministic random --------------------1 bit generators (NRBGs; also known as true random Raw data Health Tests number generators) and deterministic random bit generators (DRBGs; also known as pseudorandom (optional) Conditioning number generators). Two general models are provided in SP 800-90C, as shown in Figure 14 and Figure 15. Entropy Source Output Error message 47 Figure 13: Entropy Source Model NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017last public comment period, along with their DRBG resolutions. The testing of entropy sources Algorithm by the CAVP and CMVP will begin as soon as possible after publication. RBG Output • Monitor the testing of SP 800-90B in the CAVP and CMVP labs to determine problems Figure 14: XOR-NRBG that need to be addressed in the next version of SP 800-90B. In some cases, the Figure 14 depicts the construction of one of the problems may be addressed by additions NRBGs – the XOR-NRBG. In this construction, each to the FIPS 140-2 Implementation Guidance bit output by the entropy source (as discussed in SP document until SP 800-90B is revised. The 800-90B) is exclusive-ORed with a bit of output from Implementation Guidance document is a DRBG algorithm specifed in SP 800-90A. available at https://csrc.nist.gov/groups/STM/ cmvp/documents/fps140-2/FIPS1402IG.pdf. • Begin a revision of SP 800-90B to address issues not included in the initial version of SP Entropy RBG 800-90B, as well as any issues that surface Source Input output during CAVP and CMVP entropy source validation. • Finalize and publish 800-90C, posting the Figure 15: DRBG and Oversampling NRBG comments received and their resolution, along with the document. Figure 15 depicts the construction used for the DRBGs and the second NRBG design – the • Complete plans for testing SP 800-90C. Oversampling NRBG. In this construction. the entropy source repeatedly provides input to the DRBG FOR MORE INFORMATION, SEE: algorithm to produce the requested output. https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/random-bit-generation The diference between DRBGs and NRBGs is the CONTACTS: availability of the entropy source and the frequency Ms. Elaine Barker Mr. John Kelsey of requesting output from the entropy source. For a (301) 975-2911 (301) 975-5101 DRBG, an entropy source is only required for seeding the DRBG; after the initial seeding process, further elaine.barker@nist.gov john.kelsey@nist.gov requests for entropy-source output depend on the implementation and application. For the Oversampling Dr. Meltem Sönmez Turan Dr. Kerry McKay NRBG, the entropy source must always be available (301) 975-4391 (301) 975-4969 and is accessed whenever bits are requested from the meltem.turan@nist.gov kerry.mckay@nist.gov NRBG by a consuming application. The NIST Randomness Beacon The latest draft of SP 800-90C is available via the Special Publications page: https://csrc.nist.gov/ NIST has implemented a source of public publications/PubsSPs.html. randomness, which is available at https://beacon.nist. gov/home. It uses two independent, commercially Plans for FY 2018: available sources of randomness, each with an The RBG development team has the following independent hardware entropy source and SP goals for FY 2018: 800-90A-approved components. • Publish the initial version of SP 800-90B The NIST Beacon is designed to provide 48 and post the comments received during the unpredictability, autonomy, and consistency. ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017Unpredictability means that users cannot The project team has also made progress in algorithmically predict bits before they are made helping other institutions set up interoperable sources. available by the source. Autonomy means that the This is important because multiple sources can be source is resistant to attempts by outside parties to combined in such a way that all sources would have alter the distribution of the random bits. Consistency to be compromised in order to degrade the common means that a set of users can access the source in random strings. It is expected that the University such a way that they are confdent of receiving the of Chile will start operating their own randomness same random string. beacon during FY 2018. The NIST Beacon posts bit-strings in blocks of As of the end of FY 2017, the NIST Beacon has 512 bits every 60 seconds. Each such value is time- been functioning without major interruptions for more stamped and signed to form a packet that also includes than four years. During this time, the project team has the hash of the previous value to chain the sequence received valuable input from a growing community of values together. This prevents all parties, even the of users. As a result, the project team has redesigned source, from retroactively changing an output packet the Application Programming Interface (API) and the without being detected. The NIST Beacon keeps all architecture. The changes provide higher security and output packets. At any point in time, the full history of availability, as well as better interoperability. Version outputs is available to users. 2.0 of the NIST Beacon is scheduled to be deployed during November 2017. Tables of random numbers have probably been used for multiple purposes at least since the NIST encourages the community of users to Industrial Revolution. In the digital age, algorithmic research and publish novel ways in which this tool can pseudorandom number generators (PRNGs) have be used. largely replaced these tables. The NIST Beacon FOR MORE INFORMATION, SEE: expands the use of randomness to multiple scenarios in which neither tables nor PRNGs can be used. The https://www.nist.gov/programs-projects/nist- extra functionalities stem mainly from three features. randomness-beacon First, the Beacon-generated numbers cannot be CONTACT: predicted before they are published. Second, the public, time-bound, and authenticated nature of the Dr. René Peralta (301) 975-8702 Beacon allows a user application to prove to anybody rene.peralta@nist.gov that it used truly random numbers not known before a certain point in time. Third, this proof can be presented ofine and at any point in the future. Entropy as a Service (EaaS) Although commercially available physical sources The security of cryptography today depends of randomness are adequate as entropy sources for on having strong keys and keeping them secret. currently envisioned implementations of the NIST The ability to generate strong cryptographic keys Beacon, the NIST Randomness Beacon project team is is directly related to having access to unpredictable working on developing a source of verifably random random data, but generating truly unpredictable sequences. In collaboration with NIST physicists random data on common computing devices is hard from the Physical Measurement Laboratory (PML), and unreliable. As a result, weak keys are widely used the project team aims to use quantum non-locality in cryptographic applications, thus compromising the to build an entropy source whose unpredictability security of the sensitive data protected by them - is guaranteed by the laws of physics. In FY 2016, potentially with disastrous consequences. a major milestone was achieved, namely, a strong A primary goal of this project is to provide loophole-free test of local realism (where individual high quality, truly unpredictable random data to particles are governed by elements of reality, even devices on the Internet to enable them to generate if these elements are hidden) (see https://www.nist. strong cryptographic keys and attest the strength 49 gov/news-events/news/2015/11/nist-team-proves- of the keys used to protect data in transit or at rest, spooky-action-distance-really-real). NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017thereby enabling cryptographic system strength source. The EaaS server ensures that the FIFO bufer attestation. Achieving this goal would provide a is erased prior to server shutdown and never copied solid basis for achieving the goals of the Automated to disk. Open implementations can help ensure that Cryptographic Validation Testing project (see https:// this occurs. csrc.nist.gov/projects/acvt) as well as addressing the The client system consists of a classic computing problems targeted by the Cryptographic Programs device enabled with a dedicated hardware and Laboratory Accreditation (see the next section: component capable of storing secret cryptographic Validated Programs), where entropy estimation keys and seeds. A dedicated software application has persisted as one of the most difcult and labor- bridges the communication between EaaS and the consuming activities, causing problems for all parties hardware component. Examples of secure hardware involved: the industry, the testing laboratories and the components are the Trusted Platform Module government validators. (TPM), TrustZone technology in Advanced Reduced Random data obtained from sources of true Instruction Set Computing (RISC) Machine (ARM) randomness that are based on unpredictable physical processors, and Identity Protection Technology in phenomena, such as quantum efects, is much Intel processors. Recently, an alternative innovative better suited for cryptographic applications. CSD is technology has emerged that allows extracting collaborating with the NIST Physical Measurement unique cryptographic keys from the imperfections of Laboratory (PML) to build a quantum source. The memory Static Random Access Memory (SRAM) cells aim is to use quantum efects to generate sequences used in common computers. The idea behind this that are guaranteed to be unpredictable, even technology is to extract PUF-like unique data from the if an attacker has access to the random source. SRAM chip, which is then used to construct a unique (For more information on this collaboration, see key. This technology is quite interesting for EaaS https://www.nist.gov/pml/div684/random_ applications on the client side because it eliminates numbers_bell_test.cfm). the need to provision an initial key for accessing EaaS. If a client system or device does not have a This EaaS project aims to develop a system and secure hardware component, it can still use EaaS. The protocols for obtaining random data with high entropy presence of a hardware component simply provides from one or more remote sources. The high-level further guarantees to the system or device user, when architecture is shown in Figure 16. The architecture present. of the Entropy-as-a-Service system consists of two main parts: the client-side and the server-side. The EaaS uses the Hyper Text Transfer Protocol (HTTP) critical components of the system are the quantum to transfer entropy payloads from the server to clients. device, the EaaS server and a secure device in the To secure this transmission, the server encrypts the client systems that is capable of providing strong data using the client’s public key and digitally signs isolation and protection for the cryptographic keys the payload with the server’s own private key. stored inside the device and ofering a set of basic Client devices mix this data with locally available cryptographic services. random data to seed random number generators to The EaaS server is continuously fed random data generate strong cryptographic keys and other random from the attached quantum source. The data enters values independently from the remote sources. a frst in, frst out (FIFO)-like bufer in the server’s Random Access Memory (RAM), and, when a client request arrives, the server reads the top value from the bufer, signs and encrypts it, and then sends it to the requester. The FIFO bufer shifts after every request and when new data comes from the random 50 ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017NIST NIST Quantum / device R/•d= HashlHSM~ Quantum~1 EaaS server / ERROR: Halt Requester's network public key capability, proxy i.e. device Q.!1t he r loT /r - R(s.,! ,,. H/W Root of Trust chip; Continuous TrueRBG BEST,i f available, to health hold a provisioned monitor key pair. (SP 800-90B it:ed  tests) HHh[EaiiS:a..,. ., Otherwise, a EaaS,111 local]; protected memory/ Key;;; ORBG(,eed) file location may be used NOTE: EaaS1, ••• , EaaS, above indicate data from n different EaaS server instances; local Indicates locally available random data, If any Figure 16: High-level Architecture of EaaS With the conceptual system architecture and against integrated circuit counterfeiting and thereby protocols defned, the project team continues help secure a supply chain. The University of Florida to engage with industry and academia to obtain researchers working on this grant obtained interesting feedback on the approach and identify possibilities security results that identifed security vulnerabilities for collaborative approaches to solving important in widely used protocols for intellectual property cybersecurity challenges in the domains of protection in integrated circuit manufacturing and cryptography and supply-chain management (e.g., resulted in proposals for new secure protocols that integrated circuit counterfeiting). A published paper eliminated these vulnerabilities. on EaaS in IEEE Computer magazine generated a lot The team continues to develop the system to of interest among the public, including companies provide a publicly accessible NIST EaaS instance from the U.S. and Canada who approached the team in FY 2018. The team succeeded in establishing a and asked for assistance in implementing and hosting non-disclosure agreement and a collaboration with their own EaaS servers. The team started a technology Intrinsic ID, Inc. – a company with complementing transfer efort to help with this. The team also continues technology for constructing the initial key on the the collaboration with a team of researchers at the client side by extracting it from SRAM memory cells. University of Florida who work under a NIST research The team also established a collaborative relationship 51 grant to explore ways to leverage EaaS in protecting with Crypto4A and 2Keys Corp. from Canada on NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017developing a common protocol for EaaS. The team uniqueness of the “nonce” input; CSD plans to seek coordinated with the research team working on the public comment on how to best update the guidance NIST Beacon for developing common back-end for achieving this property. components for the two services. The team plans to FOR MORE INFORMATION, SEE: leverage these common components in the NIST EaaS implementation. https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/block-cipher- techniques CONTACT: CONTACT: Dr. Apostol Vassilev (301) 975-3221 Dr. Morris Dworkin apostol.vassilev@nist.gov (301) 975-2354 morris.dworkin@nist.gov Block Cipher Modes of Operation Key Management The engine for many of the techniques in CSD’s cryptographic toolkit is a block cipher algorithm, Key management is required for applying such as the Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) numerous cryptographic technologies and is algorithm. A block cipher transforms some fxed- considered one of the most critical aspects associated length binary data (i.e., a “block” of data) into with the use of cryptography. The CSD began seemingly random data of the same length. The providing guidance in managing the keys used for transformation is determined by the choice of some cryptographic applications in the late 1990s to early secret data called the “key.” The same key is used to 2000s. Information on the CSD’s key management reverse the transformation and recover the original project is available at https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/ block of data. A cryptographic technique (e.g., for key-management. encryption and/or authentication) that is constructed SP 800-56A, Recommendation for Pair- from a block cipher is called a “mode of operation.” Wise Key Establishment Schemes Using Discrete Several modes of operation have been specifed Logarithm Cryptography: in the SP 800-38 series of publications. The latest In FY 2017, SP 800-56A was revised. SP 800- installment in the series, Special Publication 800- 56A was originally published in 2006, and was 38G, Recommendation for Block Cipher Modes of previously revised in 2007 and 2013. This document Operation: Methods for Format-Preserving Encryption, specifes Dife-Hellman (DH) and Menezes-Qu- was published in 2016. It specifes two AES modes of Vanstone (MQV) key-agreement schemes, both operation, called FF1 and FF3, for “format-preserving elliptic curve and fnite feld versions. Key agreement encryption” (FPE), based on proposals that were results in keying material that is shared between the submitted from the private sector, specifcally, the participants. A key-agreement scheme is a procedure payments industry. in which both parties contribute information that Recently, two academic researchers, Vaudenay is used in generating a cryptographic key. A key- and Dürak, developed a cryptanalytic attack on agreement scheme is defned by a cryptographic the FF3 mode. On April 12, 2017, CSD posted an algorithm, together with other information that must announcement that summarizes the attack and be available by both parties when establishing keys. outlines CSD’s plans to revise FF3 in a new draft of The schemes are intended for use in communication SP 800-38G in FY 2018; see https://csrc.nist.gov/ protocols (e.g., Transport Layer Security (TLS), one News/2017/Recent-Cryptanalysis-of-FF3. of the protocols used by the Internet). The key- establishment schemes in SP 800-56A use public In FY 2018, CSD also plans to revisit SP 800-38D, key algorithms, and each participant in a key- which specifes the Galois/Counter Mode (GCM) for agreement transaction uses a pair of keys—a public authenticated encryption. In particular, the security key and a private key. The key-agreement process of GCM depends critically on the requirement for the 52 includes the generation of a shared secret (which is ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017not itself considered to be a cryptographic key), and • Added the KECCAK Message Authentication the derivation of keying material using the shared Code (KMAC) to the list of approved MAC secret. Several key-agreement schemes are specifed functions; KMAC is specifed in SP 800-185, in SP 800-56A. Figure 17 below provides a simplifed SHA-3 Derived Functions: cSHAKE, KMAC, example of one of the key-agreement schemes. In this TupleHash and ParallelHash. example, each party: • The elliptic curves to be used in the elliptic 1. Generates a key pair (either prior to or curve Dife-Hellman and MQV schemes will during the key-agreement transaction); henceforward be specifed in SP 800-186, a new publication under development that will 2. Obtains the public key of the other party; include the elliptic curves currently specifed in FIPS 186-4, Digital Signature Standard 3. Computes a shared secret using one’s own (DSS), along with additional approved keys and the other party’s public key; and elliptic curves for key agreement and digital 4. Derives one or more keys from the shared signatures. secret. • The key-derivation functions were moved A revision of SP 800-56A was provided for public to SP 800-56C: Recommendation for comment in FY 2017 as a draft of SP 800-56A Rev. 3. Key-Derivation Methods in Key-Derivation This revision includes the following changes: Schemes (see below). Party A (Communications) Party B 1 :~ Generate ·- Generate Key Pair Exchange Public Keys -· Key Pair ~- l l ' , Compute Shared Secret Compute Shared Secret ! ! Derive Key(s) . Derive Key(s) Figure 17: Key-Agreement Example • Encourages the use of pre-defned domain A more complete list of changes is provided in an parameter groups for the fnite feld Dife- appendix of SP 800-56A Rev. 3. SP 800-56A Rev. 3 Hellman and MQV schemes. Domain will be published in early FY 2018 and will be available parameters are used to generate keys and via the CSD publications page at https://csrc.nist. compute the shared secret. The domain- gov/publications. This web page may also be used to parameter groups include the “safe primes” access FIPS 186-4, SP 800-185, and (eventually) SP that are used in the Transport Layer Security 800-186. (TLS) and Internet Key Exchange (IKE) protocols. 53 NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017Information about SP 800-56A is also available at will be published in early FY 2018 and will be available https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800-56a/ via the CSD publications page at https://csrc.nist.gov/ rev-3/draft. publications. SP 800-135 and SP 800-185 are also available using that address. SP 800-56C: Recommendation for Key- Derivation Methods in Key-Establishment Information on SP 800-56C is also available at Schemes: https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800-56c/ rev-1/draft. SP 800-56C specifes techniques for the derivation of keys from a shared secret generated during a key- New Key Management Publications Under establishment scheme defned in SP 800-56A and SP Development: 800-56B. SP 800-56A is discussed above. SP 800- A new document was started in FY 2016 on key 56B: Recommendation for Pairwise Key-Establishment storage and recovery by an organization (e.g., key Schemes Using Integer Factorization Cryptography, is backup and archiving). This document is intended available via https://csrc.nist.gov/publications. to serve as a guideline for the storage and recovery SP 800-56C had included only one method of cryptographic keys that are not under the direct for key derivation - a two-step key-derivation control of the entity using those keys (e.g., the owner). procedure that used either the Keyed-Hash Message This includes the backup and archiving of copies of Authentication Code (HMAC) or the Cipher-based the keys and the metadata associated with them. The Message Authentication Code (CMAC) algorithm document will also discuss the recovery of those keys during the process. HMAC is specifed in FIPS 198- when required (e.g., by the key’s owner or the owner’s 1: The Keyed-Hash Message Authentication Code organization). (HMAC), and CMAC is specifed for AES in SP 800- Plans for FY 2018: 38B: Recommendation for Block Cipher Modes of Operation: the CMAC Mode of Authentication. These During FY 2018, the CSD is expecting to accomplish documents are available via https://csrc.nist.gov/ the following key management tasks: publications. • Publish the revisions of SP 800-56A and SP A revision of SP 800-56C was provided for public 800-56C. comment in FY 2017 as a draft of SP 800-56C Rev. 1. This revision includes the following changes: • Begin the revision of SP 800-56B and post it for public comment. • The single-step key derivation functions specifed in SP 800-56A and SP 800-56B • Begin revisions of SP 800-131A, Transitions: were moved into SP 800-56C, as well as the Recommendation for Transitioning the Use of references to SP 800-135: Recommendation Cryptographic Algorithms and Key Lengths, for Existing Application-Specifc Key to address the use of Triple Data Encryption Derivation Functions. Note that the relevant Algorithm (TDEA), SP 800-56A, SP 800-56B, changes to SP 800-56B (i.e., to remove the KMAC and other SHA-3 derived functions key derivation functions from the document) specifed in SP 800-185. A statement about have not been performed yet; those changes the advent of quantum-resistant algorithms will be initiated in FY 2018 (see below). will also be included. • KMAC, as specifed in Draft SP 800-185, SHA-3 • Begin revisions of SP 800-57, Part 2, Derived Functions: cSHAKE, KECCAK Message Recommendation for Key Management, Authentication Code (KMAC), TupleHash and Part 2: Best Practices for Key Management ParallelHash, is allowed for the single-step key Organization, to update the guidance. derivation functions. • Revise SP 800-57, Part 3, Recommendation for Changes to the document are discussed in an Key Management, Part 3: Application-Specifc 54 appendix of SP 800-56C Rev. 1. SP 800-56A Rev. 3 Key Management Guidance, to provide revised ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017guidance on the use of the Internet Protocol CSD has been contributing to the development Security (IPsec) protocol. of testssl.sh (see https://github.com/drwetter/testssl. sh), an open-source program that tests TLS-enabled • Continue the development of the servers, providing information about the protocols organizational key-storage and recovery and cipher suites supported, in addition to checking publication. for some well-known faws. In FY 2018, CSD will be contributing code to testssl.sh that adds support for • Resume work on SP 800-71, Recommendation TLS version 1.3. When the draft of SP 800-52 Revision for Key Establishment Using Symmetric Block 2 is posted for public comment, CSD intends to make a Ciphers. draft version of this code available that includes some FOR MORE INFORMATION, SEE: checks for conformance to SP 800-52 Revision 2. https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/key-management/ CONTACTS: cryptographic-key-management-systems Dr. Kerry McKay Dr. David Cooper CONTACTS: (301) 975-4969 (301) 975-3194 kerry.mckay@nist.gov david.cooper@nist.gov Ms. Elaine Barker Mr. Quynh Dang (301) 975-2911 (301) 975-3610 elaine.barker@nist.gov quynh.dang@nist.gov Cryptographic Recommendations for the Internet Protocol Security (IPsec) Dr. Lily Chen Dr. Allen Roginsky (301) 975-6974 (301) 975-8136 and Internet Key Exchange (IKE) lily.chen@nist.gov allen.roginsky@nist.gov IPsec is a suite of protocols for securing Internet communications at the network layer and operates Transport Layer Security within the Internet Protocol (IP). It is frequently used to establish Virtual Private Networks (VPNs), requiring SP 800-52 Guidelines for the Selection, both parties to share keying material, which can be Confguration, and Use of Transport Layer Security established using the Internet Key Exchange (IKE) (TLS) Implementations, provides recommendations protocol, and enabling telecommuters or travelers to regarding TLS server and client implementations. gain secure access to their enterprise networks. IPsec TLS is a widely used cryptographic protocol that provides the cryptographic security functions for both provides communication security for a variety of versions of the Internet Protocol, IPv4 and IPv6. network applications, such as email, e-commerce, and healthcare. CSD has provided cryptographic guidance for using IPsec and IKE in SP 800-57 part 3, Section 3: SP 800-52 was frst published in June of 2005, Internet Protocol Security (IPsec). From the beginning and SP 800-52 Revision 1 was published in 2014. of FY 2017, CSD has been working on a revision of Since the frst revision, CSD has been following the section and plans to publish it as a standalone developments in TLS implementations, including Special Publication. This SP will update and expand updates and attacks. In FY 2016, a second revision the existing cryptographic guidelines. The important was initiated that updates TLS recommendations to technical updates include disallowing Triple DES and include mitigations for recent attacks, synchronizes recommending AES-GCM authenticated encryption cryptographic algorithm recommendations with instead of the CipherBlock Chaining (CBC) mode. other NIST Special Publications, and provides more fexibility to system administrators in choosing which CSD expects to release the draft SP in FY 2018 for TLS features they should support. There is also public comments. The SP will be harmonized with an guidance for implementations of TLS version 1.3, a upcoming revision of SP 800-77, Guide to IPsec VPNs. signifcant update to TLS. SP 800-52 Revision 2 will be posted for public review and comment in FY 2018. 55 NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017CONTACTS: signature schemes will be included in FIPS 186. It is expected that the revised draft version of FIPS 186-5 Ms. Elaine Barker Mr. Quynh Dang (and SP 800-186) will be available for public comment (301) 975-2911 (301) 975-3610 in early FY 2018. elaine.barker@nist.gov quynh.dang@nist.gov CONTACTS: Elliptic Curve Cryptography Email project team: EllipticCurves@nist.gov Elliptic curve cryptography is critical to the Dr. Dustin Moody Dr. Lily Chen adoption of strong cryptography during the (301) 975-8136 (301) 975-6974 migration to higher security strengths. One of the dustin.moody@nist.gov lily.chen@nist.gov main advantages of elliptic curve cryptography is that users can achieve the same level of security as other Mr. Andrew Regenscheid systems, but with a much shorter key length. NIST has (301) 975-5155 standardized elliptic curve cryptography for digital andrew.regenscheid@nist.gov signature algorithms in FIPS 186: Digital Signature Standard (DSS), and for key establishment schemes in SP 800-56A: Recommendation for Pair-Wise Key Post-Quantum Cryptography Establishment Schemes Using Discrete Logarithm Cryptography. In recent years, there has been a substantial amount of research on quantum computers – machines In FIPS 186-4, NIST recommends 15 elliptic that exploit quantum mechanical phenomena to curves of varying security strengths for use in these solve problems that are difcult or intractable for elliptic curve cryptographic standards. However, the conventional computers. If large-scale quantum provenance of the curves is not fully specifed in the computers are ever built, they will be able to break standard, leading to recent public concerns that there the existing infrastructure of public-key cryptography could be a hidden weakness in these curves. NIST is (see Table 1). The focus of the Post-Quantum not aware of any vulnerability in these curves when Cryptography (PQC) project is to identify candidate they are implemented correctly and used as described quantum-resistant systems that are secure against in NIST standards and guidelines. both quantum and classical computers—as well as the impact that such post-quantum algorithms will have More than 15 years have now passed since these on current protocols and security infrastructures. curves were developed, and the community now knows more about the security of elliptic curve NIST researchers have held regular seminars cryptography and practical implementation issues. throughout FY 2017. The presentation topics included Advances within the cryptographic community have the latest published results and security analyses, as led to the development of new elliptic curves and well as status reports on quantum computation, hash- algorithms whose designers claim to ofer better based signatures, coding-based cryptography, lattice- performance and are easier to implement in a secure based cryptography, and multivariate cryptography. manner. Some of these curves are under consideration Through these presentations and discussions, the in voluntary, consensus-based Standards Developing project team has made signifcant progress in Organizations. understanding the strengths and weaknesses of the existing cryptographic schemes in each category. In FY 2017, NIST utilized feedback received to revise and improve FIPS 186-4. In particular, NIST plans to The NIST team also continues to be productive add new elliptic curves to the current recommended in post-quantum cryptography research. The results set. The entire collection of recommended curves and have been published at major conferences, such as their specifcation will be moved to a new publication Real World Cryptography, Number Theory Methods in SP 800-186: Recommendations for Discrete- Cryptography, Selected Areas in Cryptography, Post- Logarithm Based Cryptography: Elliptic Curve Domain Quantum Cryptography (PQCrypto), and AsiaCrypt. Parameters. In addition, new deterministic digital NIST researchers have given many presentations at 56 ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017TABLE 1: IMPACT OF QUANTUM COMPUTING ON COMMON CRYPTOGRAPHIC ALGORITHMS IMPACT FROM CRYPTOGRAPHIC TYPE PURPOSE LARGE-SCALE ALGORITHM QUANTUM COMPUTER AES Symmetric key Encryption Larger key sizes likely needed SHA-2, SHA-3 --------------- Hash functions Larger output likely needed Signatures, key RSA Public Key No longer secure establishment ECDSA, ECDH Signatures, key (Elliptic Curve Public key No longer secure exchange Cryptography) DSA, DH Signatures, key (Finite Field Public key No longer secure exchange Cryptography) venues, such as the European Telecommunication received several proposals, and the fnal submission Standardisation Institute (ETSI) Quantum-Safe deadline is in November 2017. Workshop, to increase awareness of the upcoming In FY 2018, NIST will continue to explore the migration to post-quantum cryptography, and to security and feasibility of purported quantum- engage with stakeholders in the U.S. and other resistant technologies submitted to the Post-Quantum countries. NIST has also sponsored other research, Standardization Process. NIST will hold a public education, and research events. workshop in April 2018, co-located with the PQCrypto In 2016, NIST published NISTIR 8105: Report conference in Florida, during which submitters will be on Post-Quantum Cryptography, which shared the invited to present their algorithms. The Post-Quantum team’s current understanding about the status of Standardization Process will proceed with multiple quantum computing and post-quantum cryptography. rounds of public evaluation and analysis, with the goal Shortly thereafter, NIST began the Post-Quantum of selecting algorithms for standardization by NIST Standardization Process, a thorough multi-year after three to fve years of analysis. efort with the objective of creating new quantum- FOR MORE INFORMATION, SEE: resistant cryptographic standards for public-key encryption and digital signatures (see https://www. https://www.nist.gov/pqcrypto nist.gov/pqcrypto). These functionalities are much CONTACTS: more complex than AES or SHA-3, and will require fundamentally new techniques to address several Email project team: pqc@nist.gov open research questions in this area (for example, how Dr. Dustin Moody Dr. Lily Chen to measure security against quantum attacks when a (301) 975-8136 (301) 975-6974 quantum computer has not yet been built). Submitters dustin.moody@nist.gov lily.chen@nist.gov from around the world are invited to propose quantum-resistant cryptosystems for consideration Dr. Yi-Kai Liu by NIST as part of the PQC standardization process. (301) 975-6499 In December 2016, after resolving and assessing yi-kai.liu@nist.gov 57 public comments, NIST issued the fnal submission requirements and evaluation criteria. NIST has NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017Circuit Complexity CSD is also researching circuit-based security metrics for cryptographic functions. For a function Cryptographic functions, such as those used to be secure (in particular, one-way), it must be the for encryption, digital signatures, and hashing, are case that any circuit that implements it is sufciently implemented as electronic circuits for a wide class of complex. In particular, a function is insecure if it can be applications. In practice, it is important to be able to implemented by a circuit containing too few Boolean reduce the size and depth of these circuits. Size impacts AND gates. This security metric — the number of AND energy consumption and power requirements. Depth gates necessary and sufcient to implement a function largely determines the speed at which the functions — is called multiplicative complexity. Unfortunately, are evaluated by the circuit. This reduction problem determining multiplicative complexity is extremely is closely related to designing small (and low-depth) hard. In previous years, the CSD was able to determine combinational circuits, which contain only logical the multiplicative complexity of all Boolean functions gates (i.e., no registers are used, and there is no clock). on up to fve input bits. This year the team was able Figure 18 below shows one such circuit, for performing to do the same for all functions on six inputs (there inversion in GF(24). are 264 such functions). ITL was able to exhibit specifc functions on n bits which are impossible to calculate Finding optimal combinational circuits is MAX- with fewer than n AND gates. Also as a result of SNP Complete. In practice, this means that it is this classifcation, it was possible to determine the necessary to settle for methods that design “good” multiplicative complexity of the symmetric function circuits, as opposed to provably optimal circuits. CSD S(8,4) – problems that had remained unresolved for has developed and implemented new solutions for many years. the circuit-minimization problem. There is a tradeof between the size and depth of circuits. Heuristics that Secure multi-party computation is a technique do well with respect to one of these metrics tend to do that allows a group of people to compute a function of so at the expense of the other one. In cooperation with their inputs without revealing the inputs themselves. colleagues at the University of Southern Denmark, Examples of this are: 1) holding an election; 2) CSD developed a new heuristic that simultaneously conducting closed-bid auctions in which only the reduces size and depth. winning bid is determined; 3) proving to a third party that a person’s encrypted attributes satisfy some x0 x1 x2 x3 requirement, such as being “over 21 and (U.S. citizen or Canadian citizen)”. The protocols that solve secure s1 = x0 ⊕ x1 multi-party computation problems often encrypt t1 = x0 ⊼ x3 XOR NAND AND NAND XOR t2 = x0 ∧ x2 bits using arithmetic modulo 2. The complexity of s1 t1 t2 t3 s2 t3 = x1 ⊼ x 2 such protocols largely depends on the number of s2 = x2⊕ x3 multiplications required. Hence, expressing functions t4 = s1 ∧ t 1 as a circuit with only a few multiplication (AND) gates AND XOR XOR AND s3 = x1⊕ t2 is important. Some of the circuits published are now t4 s4 t5 s4 = t2 ⊕ x3 a standard reference for the benchmarking of secure s3 t5 = t3 ∧ s2 multi-party computation protocols. t6 = s1 ∧ s 4 AND AND XOR s5 = t2 ⊕ t5 The results on circuit size and depth, and on t6 t7 s5 t7 = s3 ∧ s 2 multiplicative complexity were presented at the 2nd s6 = t4 ⊕ t 2 International Workshop on Boolean Functions and s7 = t6 ⊕ x 1 their Applications (Bergen, Norway). Circuits are XOR XOR XOR s8 = t7⊕ x3 periodically posted at https://csrc.nist.gov/Projects/ s6 s7 s8 y0 = s5 Circuit-Complexity/Circuit-Problems. y1 = s8 y2 = s6 CONTACT: y0 y1 y2 y3 y3 = s7 Dr. René Peralta (301) 975-8702 58 Figure 18: Inversion in GF(24) rene.peralta@nist.gov ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017Lightweight Cryptography FOR MORE INFORMATION, SEE: https://www.nist.gov/programs-projects/lightweight- There are several emerging areas in which cryptography highly constrained devices are interconnected and https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/itl- working in concert to accomplish a task. Examples bulletin/2017/06/toward-standardizing-lightweight- of these areas include automotive systems, sensor cryptography/fnal networks, healthcare, distributed control systems, the Internet of Things (IoT), cyber-physical systems, CONTACTS: and the smart grid. Security and privacy can be very Mr. Lawrence Bassham Dr. Kerry McKay important in these areas. Because most of the modern (301) 975-3292 (301) 975-4969 cryptographic algorithms were designed for desktop/ lawrence.bassham@nist.gov kerry.mckay@nist.gov server environments, many of these algorithms cannot be implemented in the constrained devices Dr. Meltem Sönmez Turan used by these applications. When current NIST- (301) 975-4391 approved algorithms can be engineered to ft into meltem.turan@nist.gov the limited resources of constrained environments, their performance may not be acceptable. For these Cryptography Applications in reasons, NIST started a lightweight cryptography project in 2013 that was tasked with determining the Wireless and Mobile Security need and developing a strategy for the standardization Today, wireless networks have been integrated of lightweight cryptographic algorithms. into modern communication systems that connect In October 2016, CSD held the Second Lightweight mobile devices using multiple radio technologies. Such Cryptography Workshop for representatives from heterogeneous networks demand integrated security government, industry, and academia. The workshop led solutions. CSD has worked closely with diferent to the publication of NISTIR 8114, Report on Lightweight working groups in the IEEE 802 LAN/MAN Standards Cryptography. This report provides an overview of Committee since 2006 and made solid contributions the lightweight cryptography project at NIST, and to the security solutions for wireless networks. The describes a plan for the standardization of lightweight NIST team has been involved in the IEEE 802.11 and cryptographic algorithms. A draft whitepaper, Profles IEEE 802.21 working groups to develop standards for the Lightweight Cryptography Standardization for cryptographic key management schemes for the Process, was released for public comment in order mobility environment. NIST cryptographic standards to receive community feedback on the goals for the have been extensively used in the wireless standards frst set of NIST lightweight cryptography standards. developed in the IEEE 802 community. The functionality that will be requested for this frst In FY 2017, NIST researchers continuously set of standards are authenticated encryption with collaborated with the IEEE 802.21 Working Group. associated data (AEAD) with optional hashing. A IEEE 802.21 “Media Independent Handover Services call for algorithm submissions for the lightweight Framework” was published, and IEEE 802.21.1 “Media cryptography portfolio will be announced in FY 2018, Independent Services” was fnalized for publication. along with details of the selection process. These new standards address the future connectivity NISTIR 8114 and the Lightweight Cryptography and management requirements of Smart Grid, IoT and project were featured in the June 2017 ITL bulletin, Smart Home networks, where multimode wireless and CSD presented a poster on the project during devices and smart end nodes incorporate diferent ITL Science Day in October 2016. The Lightweight wireless interfaces, and need to switch among the Cryptography project was presented at several venues networks during an ongoing communication session, in FY 2017, including Real World Crypto, HighLight: while maintaining the same security posture. IEEE High Security Lightweight Cryptography, and the rump 802.21 and IEEE 802.21.1 adopted NIST standardized sessions of the Eurocrypt and Crypto conferences. cryptographic algorithms, such as ECDSA, as specifed 59 in FIPS 186-4, and AES-CCM, as specifed in SP 800- 38C. NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017The recently revealed KRACK attack on the IEEE Figure 19 illustrates three blocks in a blockchain, 802.11 wireless network leads to generating the same where each block contains at least one transaction, a key stream in the case of AES-CCM, or recovering the nonce and the hash value of the previous block in the authentication key, in the case of AES-GCM through chain. a man-in-the-middle attack to create a counter The most well-known example of the use of a reset condition. The KRACK attack confrms that it is blockchain is BitCoin and similar digital currencies. essential to make sure that the special features and However, the use of blockchains has been proposed assumptions for using each cryptographic algorithm for other applications, such as smart contracts and are considered in the protocol design so that the various ledgering applications. requirements are satisfed to assure security in any circumstance. Many organizations have suggested applications for the use of blockchains, some of which may not In FY 2018, CSD will continue to contribute to IEEE be appropriate. CSD is investigating the use of 802 wireless standards. CSD will work with the IEEE blockchains to determine which application types are 802.11 working group to develop countermeasures for appropriate for using blockchains and which are not. the KRACK attack. CSD is monitoring the proposed uses of cryptography CONTACT: to assure that current cryptographic techniques are used properly and whether new techniques are Dr. Lily Chen required. (301) 975 -6974 lily.chen@nist.gov During FY 2017, NIST participated in standards activities exploring blockchain technologies, Blockchains architectures, and use cases. These included participation in a new blockchain study group CSD began studying the use of blockchains, sponsored by American Standards Committee X9, which have been suggested as a solution for the fnancial services committee of the American many applications. A blockchain is a distributed National Standards Institute (ANSI), and continued database that maintains a continuously growing work in the International Standards Organization list of records called blocks that are secured from (ISO) Technical Committee (TC) for Blockchains undetected modifcation using a hash function. and Distributed Ledger Technologies (ISO/TC 307). Each block contains a link to the previous block. A Established in 2016, the initial objectives of ISO/TC 307 new block is added to the chain only when multiple include defning key terms and concepts, exploring parties (possibly mutually untrusted parties) agree reference architectures, investigating use cases, and to its accuracy. In essence, a blockchain is a mutually identifying identity and privacy implications within agreed-upon record of history. blockchain technologies and architectures. NIST has Tlmestamp Tlmestamp T1mestamp Nonce Nonce Nonce Time 60 Figure 19: Example of a Blockchain ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017been participating in these activities via the national specifcations. To that end, the CSD develops test mirror committee within the InterNational Committee suites and test methods; provides implementation for Information Technology Standards (INCITS). ISO/ guidance and technical support to industry forums; TC 307 will meet in November 2017, where the reports and conducts education, training, and outreach on these topics will be reviewed and new work will be programs. established. CSD’s validation programs work together with During FY 2017, CSD established the NIST Internal independent laboratories that are accredited by the Blockchain Workbench to support internal research National Voluntary Laboratory Accreditation Program exploring blockchain technologies and use cases. (NVLAP). Based on independent laboratory test The workbench itself is hosted on internal servers, reports and test evidence provided by the labs, the and is currently running two blockchains – the frst validation programs described below validate the is a permissioned blockchain utilizing the MultiChain implementation-under-test. Awarded validations are blockchain platform; the second is Ethereum, subsequently published on NIST websites. which has been confgured to run only within the workbench. In addition to the blockchain software Cryptographic Algorithm Validation itself, the workbench has demonstration applications Program (CAVP) with source code, software development tools and several diagnostic tool suites available for researchers The Cryptographic Algorithm Validation Program to utilize. NIST/ITL plans to continue advancing the (CAVP) provides federal agencies in the United States capabilities of the workbench and expanding the and Canada with assurance that a cryptographic types of blockchains available in FY 2018. algorithm has been implemented completely and correctly, as specifed in its approved Federal CONTACTS: Information Processing Standard (FIPS-Approved) Ms. Elaine Barker Mr. John Kelsey or NIST-recommended cryptographic algorithm (301) 975-2911 (301) 975-5101 standard. The CAVP was established in 2013 as a ebarker@nist.gov john.kelsey@nist.gov joint program in collaboration between NIST and the Communications Security Establishment (CSE) Dr. René Peralta Mr. Andrew Regenscheid of Canada. Prior to this date, the CAVP’s functions (301) 975-8702 (301) 975-5155 were included in the Cryptographic Module Validation rene.peralta@nist.gov andrew.regenscheid@nist.gov Program (CMVP). With the increase in the number and complexity of FIPS-Approved and NIST-recommended Mr. Dylan Yaga cryptographic algorithms, it was deemed necessary (301) 975-6004 to establish the CAVP as an independent program. dylan.yaga@nist.gov The CAVP’s goal is to provide federal agencies with a security metric list to use in validating cryptographic algorithm implementations, and promote the use VALIDATION PROGRAMS of validated algorithms by industry and the public. The testing is carried out by independent third- party laboratories accredited by the NVLAP, and the validations performed by the CAVP program Federal agencies, industry, and the public rely on provide this metric. Federal agencies, industry, and many of the standards and specifcations supported the public can choose validated implementations by ITL. Poor implementations of these standards of cryptographic algorithms from the CAVP or specifcations may render a product insecure, Validated Algorithms List and have confdence in the potentially placing sensitive information at risk. ITL claimed level of security and assurance of correct operates several validation programs that help provide implementation. a level of assurance that products meet established 61 security requirements and conform to published The validation of cryptographic algorithms NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017by the CAVP is a prerequisite to the validation of a through defned sets of security requirements. For cryptographic module by the CMVP and is also used by the CAVP, a validation system document is designed other programs outside of NIST as well. Since federal for each FIPS-approved or NIST-recommended agencies are required to use validated cryptographic cryptographic algorithm. See the website for a listing modules for the protection of sensitive unclassifed (see https://csrc.nist.gov/groups/STM/cavp/). The information, the validated modules and the validated four Annexes to FIPS 140-2 reference the underlying algorithms that the modules contain represent the cryptographic algorithm standards or methods. culmination and delivery of CSD’s cryptography- By the end of FY 2017, the CAVP had issued based work to the end user. approximately 28,710 validations, representing the The CAVP validation program provides algorithm validations of approximately 18 approved documented methodologies for conformance testing algorithms, including 5 modes of operation. CAVP Validation Status By FYs 6000 5000 4000 3000 2000 1000 0 ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017 6991YF 8991YF 0002YF 2002YF 4002YF 6002YF 8002YF 0102YF 2102YF 4102YF 6102YF Figure 20: CAVP Validation Status by Fiscal Year 62CA VP Validation Status For FYI 7  TOES 1400  SHA3 1200  SHA  1000 RSA  KDF 800  KAS 600 DH.MAC  400 ECDSA ODSA 200 DDRBG 0  ComponentTest ~.. . ~ ~. r .- -- r .- -- r .- -- r .- -- .r- -- r .- -- r .- -- r .- -- r .- --  AES ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ - ~ ~ ~ 0(.I z~ Q( ~.I ~i , ~. ~Q ~" ~' " -"= <'"- ~> ~ , ~§ ~ -b= <Jl 0= ~ 0 - Figure 21: CAVP Validation Status for FY 2017 CAVP Validated Implementation Actual Numbers Updated As: Friday, November 03, 2017 FiscalYear AES Comp. DES DSA DRBG ECDSAHMAC KAS KDF RNG RSA SHA SJ TDES Total FY1996 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 FY1997 0 0 11 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 2 0 26 FY1998 0 0 27 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 42 FY1999 0 0 30 14 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 12 1 0 57 FY2000 0 0 29 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 12 1 28 77 FY2001 0 0 41 15 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 28 0 51 135 FY2002 30 0 44 21 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 59 6 58 218 FY2003 66 0 49 24 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 63 3 73 278 FY2004 82 0 41 17 0 0 0 0 0 28 22 77 0 70 337 FY2005 145 1 54 31 0 14 115 0 0 108 80 122 2 102 774 FY2006 131 1 3 33 0 19 87 0 0 91 63 120 1 83 632 FY2007 238 5 0 63 0 35 127 0 0 137 130 171 1 136 1043 FY2008 271 7 0 77 4 41 158 0 0 137 129 191 0 122 1137 FY2009 373 2 0 71 23 33 193 6 0 142 143 224 1 138 1349 FY2010 406 2 0 70 31 39 179 12 0 150 155 239 0 142 1425 FY2011 476 11 0 102 79 68 201 34 0 148 183 255 0 177 1734 FY2012 654 24 0 121 122 92 283 20 3 157 231 323 1 248 2279 FY2013 778 88 0 106 145 113 276 12 9 132 208 293 0 217 2377 FY2014 595 223 0 95 167 96 276 14 23 63 225 314 0 196 2287 FY2015 1179 226 0 99 320 164 355 32 35 80 243 396 0 258 3387 FY2016 1357 329 0 125 339 214 422 50 32 23 305 463 0 303 3967 FY2017 1786 503 0 170 426 271 508 88 52 0 391 547 0 371 5147 Total 8567 1422 331 1276 1656 1199 3180 268 154 1396 2508 3922 19 2773 28710 63 Figure 22: Validated Implementation Actual Numbers NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017The CAVP issued approximately 5,000 algorithm Validated Modules List and have confdence in the validations in FY 2017, an increase of approximately claimed level of security and assurance of correct 100 validations from the previous year. The increase in implementation. validations is attributed to an increase in cryptographic Cryptographic module testing and validation are modules being validated and other outside programs based on published NIST standards. Since federal now requiring CAVP validated implementations, agencies are required to use validated cryptographic e.g., the National Information Assurance Partnership modules for the protection of sensitive unclassifed (NIAP). information, the validated modules and the validated The number of algorithms submitted for validation algorithms that the modules contain represent the continues to grow, representing signifcant growth in culmination and delivery of the CSD’s cryptography- the number of validations expected to be available in based work to the end user. the future. The CMVP validates modules that are used in a FOR MORE INFORMATION, SEE: wide variety of products, including Internet browsers, radios, smart cards, space-based communications, https://csrc.nist.gov/groups/computer-security- munitions, security tokens, mobile phones, network division/security-testing-validation-and- and storage devices, and products supporting measurement the Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) and electronic CONTACT: commerce. A module may be a standalone product, Mr. Harold Booth such as a virtual private network (VPN) or smart card, (301) 975-8441 or it could be a module embedded in many products, harold.booth@nist.gov such as a cryptographic-based toolkit. As a result, a small number of modules may be incorporated within (Editors’ Note: Sharon Keller worked on this hundreds of products. program until her recent retirement.) The theme for FY 2017 was modernization. As part of the launch of the new Computer Security Resource Cryptographic Module Validation Center (CSRC) web site, the CMVP web pages were Program (CMVP) redesigned and now have a new look with additional functionality. The CMVP was automated to improve The Cryptographic Module Validation Program its validation processes, the Cryptographic Validation (CMVP) was developed to support the federal user Program (CVP) Certifcation Exam was developed, and communities for strong, independently tested, and collaboration was continued with the Cryptographic commercially available cryptographic modules. Modules User Forum (CMUF) to publish new CMVP Through this program, the CMVP works with Implementation Guidance (IG). international government, public and private sectors The CMVP uses an automation system to manage as a part of the cryptographic community to achieve the validation workfow. This automation continues to standards-based security and assurance of correct reduce the administrative overhead for the program implementation. The goal is to provide federal allowing the staf to focus on addressing the technical agencies with a security metric list to use in procuring needs of the community. The automated system tracks and deploying validated cryptographic modules, and the status of each submission and identifes the order promote the use of those modules by industry and that the submission should be reviewed, based on the public. The testing performed by independent when the submission was added to the CMVP queue. third-party laboratories accredited by NVLAP, and the In FY 2017, the CMVP awarded 271 new certifcates. validations performed by the CMVP program provide Figure 23 displays the number of certifcates that this metric. Federal agencies, industry, and the public were issued by security level. can choose cryptographic modules and/or products containing cryptographic modules from the CMVP 64 ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017In February 2017, the CMVP adopted the fve FY 2017 CMVP Certificates year Validation Sunsetting Policy that moved all 271 Total FIPS 140-1 validation entries and all validations that were completed prior to February 1, 2012 from the 2, 1% 28, 10% Active Validation List to the Historical Validation List. This was done to ensure that modules on the Active Validation List are compliant with the latest standards and guidance. In January 2018, the CMVP will drop modules to the historical list that have not 138, 51% 103, 38% been validated within two years of report or billing submission, whichever occurred frst. This is to encourage the completion of projects and to ensure that the MIP list refects modules that are actively in the validation process. • Level 1 • Level 2 • Level 3 • Level 4 In order to demonstrate profciency in the technical areas addressed by Handbook 150-17, NVLAP Cryptographic and Security Testing, the Figure 23: FY 2017 CMVP CMVP activated the CVP Certifcation Exam in July Certifcates by Security Level 2017. This exam is now required as part of the initial and renewal accreditation process. The profciency Initially, this system automated the creation and testing was previously handled by the NVLAP/ transmittal of billing invoices, but then was further CMVP technical assessors at the onsite audit, but is enhanced to allow laboratories to submit those now being managed through a third-party testing invoices in advance of the report submission. For facility. Each laboratory must have a minimum of two laboratories and vendors who elect to take advantage testers who pass the exam to be eligible for initial or of this, the amount of time that submissions wait in renewal accreditation. The certifcation will remain the queue prior to being assigned has been reduced, with the individual tester making it easier to access which in turn lessens the overall time to validation. the laboratory’s overall competency, as its staf may This enhancement provides signifcant time savings change over time. In support of this efort, the CMVP and was achieved due to the continued collaborative also created a web site and user’s guide that provides efort between the CMVP and NIST Receivables. information on this new certifcation process. In order to provide a greater transparency to In September 2017, the NIST CSRC launched a new the laboratories, the CMVP sends a weekly report to website. In support of that efort, the CMVP updated each laboratory providing a status of each of their its web pages to include both basic and advanced submissions. The CMVP provides those reports to search capabilities. The basic search results in the list apprise the laboratories of the current state of each of all active validated modules. The more advanced submission along with their respective payment search allows the user to search on specifc felds status. This has mitigated the number of status and to retrieve historical and revoked certifcates. For requests that need to be addressed by the CMVP. each validation, there are links provided to related Since August 2015, the CMVP produces a separate fles that direct the user to the module’s security Implementation Under Test (IUT) list from the policy and to the applicable consolidated certifcate. Modules In Process (MIP) list. The IUT list is merely The consolidated certifcates are generated once a provided as a marketing service for vendors. However, month and include the individual validations that to encourage this list to be kept up to date, the CMVP were completed within that particular month. The implemented a new policy to drop IUT entries that are posting of the most current CMVP IG document was greater than 18 months old. The MIP list continues to also separated from the archived versions that are still refect the status of the current work that is actively in accessible for historical reference. 65 the validation process. NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017The CMVP has maintained the relationship with CONTACT: the CMUF by supporting the monthly CMUF general Ms. Beverly Trapnell membership meetings and the CMUF working (301) 975-6745 groups. The working groups are chaired by a member beverly.trapnell@nist.gov of industry and/or laboratory personnel. Each working group includes a representative from the Automated Cryptographic Validation CMVP. The current working group tasks include the Revalidation and Response to Common Vulnerabilities (ACV) Testing and Exposures (CVEs), ROM Integrity Testing in Constrained Devices, and Testing Equivalency. The Cryptographic Module Validation Program Working groups are dissolved once discussions on (CMVP) was established on July 17, 1995 by NIST to the topics are completed, and guidance is typically validate cryptographic modules for conformance to published. the Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS) 140-1, Security Requirements for Cryptographic In order to provide predicable support for Modules, and other FIPS cryptography-based vendors and laboratories needing guidance, the standards. FIPS 140-2 was released on May 25, 2001 CMVP implemented a quarterly IG release process. and supersedes FIPS 140-1. New draft IGs and revisions to currently posted IGs are sent out once a month to the laboratories for The current implementation of the CMVP is shown comments. Vendors are encouraged to provide their in Figure 24 below. The CMVP leverages the National feedback, so draft IGs are also posted on the CMUF Voluntary Laboratory Accreditation Program (NVLAP) Forum. The comments are adjudicated by the CMVP, accredited Cryptographic and Security Testing (CST) and the fnalized IGs are incorporated into the main laboratories for validation testing against the Derived IG document, which is posted quarterly on the CMVP Test Requirements (DTR), Implementation Guidance web site. (IG), and applicable CMVP programmatic guidance. According to existing guidance, the CST laboratories For FY 2018, the CMVP is anticipating the approval must perform 100 % independent testing of the of FIPS 140-3. When approved, the CMVP will create modules submitted by the vendors. the necessary documents and processes to support the transition from FIPS 140-2 to FIPS 140-3. The The structure and the rules under which the CMVP CMVP will continue to: operates worked well for the level of the technology utilized by the Federal Government when the • Invest in automation to streamline the program was created more than two decades ago. As validation process and improve review technology progresses and cryptography becomes consistency, ubiquitous in the federal IT infrastructure, the plethora of cryptographic module validations has proven • Strengthen its relationship with the CMUF by to outstrip available human resources for vendors, collaborating on new and improved technical third-party testing laboratories and federal validators guidance and programmatic issues, and alike. As the number and complexity of modules to • Support the ICMC committee to continue be validated increases, the existing methodologies strengthening the relationship with vendors face a limit on their ability to catch and eliminate all and laboratories. possible defects that could compromise the security. Testing is exceedingly long — well beyond typical FOR MORE INFORMATION, SEE: product-development cycles across a wide range of https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/cryptographic-module- technologies — yet costly and inefective. The resulting validation-program/module-validation-lists validated modules often do not provide useful https://wsr.pearsonvue.com/nist-cmvp interfaces for integration into IT systems to enable run-time monitoring of modules for compliance with FISMA. 66 ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017Accredit ed IUT Cryp1t10gr~p h le i!!ind • vendor reques.fSM ald a oo al lmpleiromiatlon 5' uri yTes.ti i • subm rs the modlll fortes 118 Cryp •osra p i,c Laboratory Modu I!' vl!'nd or IVT • La!bp erforms cvlcw- conform :et es- • WIM!nI s ln•roicek p,ald, cwo CMVP rel/le ers a e • P!1lparl?'Stl-:'f.t report a99i.!lneadn d r~ili'l't the submitted documients • CMVPP OCi s ~ne,cl tu n nage t!Mc! oordlnaoon phas.e Crypto rap hie and . 40-2 Cry-ptogra ph le Mo-dule Test. Ri!!!prot Module5-Li.st ltttp;f/<= ,ri st.ii<'Y/'1:ro\lP~Tl\1f,::nmi/d~140-1/1dl]y all,h Figure 24: Current Validation Flow NIST recognizes the need to improve the efciency The scope of this project is broken into multiple and efectiveness of cryptographic module testing phases to be performed over several years: to reduce the time and cost required for testing, Phase 1 while providing a high level of assurance for Federal Government consumers. • Identify potential approaches, The principal goals of this project are to • Select the best technical approach or collaborate with commercial or open source producers approaches to prototype, and of cryptographic capabilities and government consumers of FIPS 140-validated modules to: • Document the technical approach. • Improve the efciency and efectiveness of Phase 2 cryptographic module testing by adopting the • Develop working prototypes, and best practices used by industry; • Evaluate the prototypes against the principal • Develop test procedures and techniques that goals. provide assurance of module compliance to FIPS 140 in an automated manner, based Phase 3 on machine-readable artifacts or evidence (examples of machine readable artifacts are • Publish a draft, provide a review period, XML or JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) adjudicate the comments, and publish the fles containing logs from performed tests and fnal version. the corresponding results – see examples at Phase 4 https://github.com/usnistgov/ACVP); and • Integrate the fnal version into the operational • Identify techniques and procedures that CMVP program. provide continued assurance of operational compliance to FIPS 140 for cryptographic The new structure of the CMVP is shown in Figure modules throughout their lifecycle. 67 25. It leverages automation through computer analysis of test results. NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017Proxy/Validation Authority Architecture Automated Cryptographic Validation System ACV Protocol s:t::-t•o r•s•- 5 ---- esponses Device Under Test ' Vendor ACV Server I NIST ACV Server Figure 25: Updated CMVP Structure Leveraging Automation b. Modules in cloud environments, Currently, the project is focused on completing the documentation of the technical approach for c. Hardware; and automating the algorithm testing and fnalizing 3. Positioning and relationships to other the implementation of the automated algorithm government validation programs. testing server. The team is also working on researching the approaches for automating the software module testing. The team working on this The project has several planned deliverables, project, in collaboration with industry, established including the identifcation of prospective technical a demonstration algorithm testing server that is approaches that adopt industry best practices and currently capable of testing over 30 algorithms (see produce artifacts that are machine readable and map https://demo.acvts.nist.gov/acvp/home). The work to FIPS 140 DTR requirements, and a selection of the is progressing, and new algorithms are added to it best technical and feasible approaches. on an ongoing basis. Eventually, this demonstration CONTACT: functionality will be transferred into the production Dr. Apostol Vassilev server for algorithm validation testing. The team developed criteria for participation in the automated (301) 975-3221 testing for commercial companies wishing to validate apostol.vassilev@nist.gov their cryptographic algorithm implementations. The criteria are positioned as an annex to NIST Handbook Automated Security Testing and Test 150-17, NVLAP Cryptographic and Security Testing, Suite Development which NVLAP uses to accredit laboratories. This criteria will be used, beginning in FY 2018, to establish The CAVP utilizes the requirements and a new testing scope for algorithm testing. specifcations of the NIST standards (i.e., FIPS and Special Publications) to develop algorithm validation The project activities are structured by work areas test suites and an automated security testing tool. in order for subject-matter experts to more narrowly The CAVP is responsible for providing assurance focus on program needs and develop solutions: that the cryptographic algorithm implementations 1. Algorithm and Protocol Testing; contained in cryptographic modules are implemented according to the specifcations in the standards. The 2. Cryptographic Module Testing, CAVP accomplishes this by designing and developing a. Software, conformance testing specifc to each cryptographic 68 algorithm. ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017The conformance testing consists of a suite of During the last few years, CSD has expanded validation tests for each approved cryptographic its publications to contain not only the algorithm’s algorithm. These validation tests exercise the specifcations, but also requirements for an algorithm’s algorithmic requirements and mathematical use. Many of these usage requirements do not fall formulas to assure that the detailed specifcations within the scope of the CAVP, because the CAVP are implemented correctly and completely. If the focuses on the correctness of the instructions within implementer deviates from the specifcations in the the algorithm’s boundary. If these additional algorithm standard or excludes any part of these specifcations usage requirements are not considered applicable or requirements, the validation test will detect the to the algorithm’s implementation, they cannot be deviations and fail. The validation testing will indicate tested at the algorithm level by the CAVP, but may be that the algorithm implementation does not function tested by the CMVP if the requirements are considered properly or is incomplete. applicable to the cryptographic module. However, some of these usage requirements may be outside The cryptographic algorithm validation tests the scope of both the algorithm implementation designed and developed by the CAVP are used by and cryptographic module. In this latter case, the independent third-party laboratories accredited by fulfllment of the requirements is the responsibility of NVLAP. The laboratory works with vendors to validate entities using, installing, or confguring applications or their cryptographic algorithm implementations. The protocols that use the cryptographic algorithms. For suite of validation tests for each algorithm ensures the example, depending on the design of a cryptographic repeatability of tests and the equivalency of results module, it may not be possible for the module to across the testing laboratories. determine whether a specifc key is used for multiple purposes, a situation that is strongly discouraged. There are several types of validation tests, all designed to satisfy the testing requirements of the The CAVP currently has algorithm validation cryptographic algorithms and their specifcations. testing for the following cryptographic algorithms: These include Known-Answer Tests, Monte Carlo Tests, and Multi-Block Message Tests. The Known- Answer Tests are designed to examine the individual -\' 0 components of the algorithm by supplying known ·. . SHA..f values to the variables and verifying the expected ~ result. Negative testing is also performed by ~.·. / SHA-224 supplying known incorrect values to assure that ..~, ~· Q J • (SHA-2) the implementation recognizes values that are not allowed. The Monte Carlo Test is designed to exercise ~-f-1 SHA-256 the entire implementation-under-test (IUT). This test "• , 1 , • - . (SHA-2) is designed to detect the presence of implementation faws that are not detected with the controlled input of the Known-Answer Tests. The types of implementation faws detected by this validation test include pointer problems, insufcient allocation of space, improper error handling, and incorrect behavior of the IUT. The Multi-Block Message Test (MMT) is designed Credit: Shutterstock/Olivier Le Moal to test the ability of the implementation to process multi-block messages, which requires the chaining of Various Types of SHAs information from one block to the next. 69 NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017TABLE 2: CRYPTOGRAPHIC ALGORITHMS & NIST TECHNICAL DOCUMENTS (FIPS & SPs) FEDERAL INFORMATION PROCESSING CRYPTOGRAPHIC STANDARD (FIPS), SPECIAL PUBLICATION ALGORITHM/COMPONENT (SP) OR OTHER REFERENCE DOCUMENT SP 800-67, Recommendation for the Triple Data Encryption Algorithm (TDEA) Block Cipher, and Triple Data Encryption Standard (TDES) SP 800-38A, Recommendation for Block Cipher Modes of Operation–Methods and Techniques FIPS 197, Advanced Encryption Standard, and Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) SP 800-38A, Recommendation for Block Cipher Modes of Operation–Methods and Techniques FIPS 186-2, Digital Signature Standard (DSS), with change notice 1 and Digital Signature Algorithm (DSA) FIPS 186-4, Digital Signature Standard (DSS) FIPS 186-2, Digital Signature Standard (DSS), with Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm change notice 1 and ANS X9.62 and (ECDSA) FIPS 186-4, Digital Signature Standard (DSS) and ANS X9.62 FIPS 186-4, Digital Signature Standard (DSS) and RSA Algorithm ANS X9.31 and Public Key Cryptography Standards (PKCS) #1 v2.1: RSA Cryptography Standard-2002 Hashing algorithms SHA-1, SHA-224, SHA-256, SHA- FIPS 180-4, Secure Hash Standard (SHS) 384, SHA-512, SHA-512/224, SHA-512/256 Hashing algorithms SHA3-224, SHA3-256, SHA3-384, FIPS 202, SHA-3 Standard: Permutation-Based Hash SHA3-512 and Extendable-Output Functions, August 2015 SHA-3 Extendable-Output Functions (XOFs) FIPS 202, SHA-3 Standard: Permutation-Based Hash SHAKE128, SHAKE256 and Extendable-Output Functions, August 2015 FIPS 186-2 Appendix 3.1 and 3.2; ANS X9.62 Random Number Generator (RNG) algorithms Appendix A.4 SP 800-90A, Recommendation for Random Deterministic Random Bit Generators (DRBG) Number Generation Using Deterministic Random Bit Generators Keyed-Hash Message Authentication Code (HMAC) FIPS 198-1, The Keyed-Hash Message Authentication using SHA-1, SHA-2 and SHA-3 Code (HMAC) SP 800-38B, Recommendation for Block Cipher Cipher-based Message Authentication Code (CMAC) Modes of Operation: The CMAC Mode for 70 Mode for Authentication Authentication ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017TABLE 2 (CONT): CRYPTOGRAPHIC ALGORITHMS & NIST TECHNICAL DOCUMENTS (FIPS & SPs) FEDERAL INFORMATION PROCESSING CRYPTOGRAPHIC STANDARD (FIPS), SPECIAL PUBLICATION ALGORITHM/COMPONENT (SP) OR OTHER REFERENCE DOCUMENT SP 800-38C, Recommendation for Block Counter with Cipher Block Chaining-Message Cipher Modes of Operation: the CCM Mode for Authentication Code (CCM) Mode Authentication and Confdentiality SP 800-38D, Recommendation for Block Cipher GCM, Galois Message Authentication Code (GMAC), and Modes of Operation: Galois/Counter Mode (GCM) eXtended Packet Number (XPN) Modes and GMAC SP 800-38E, Recommendation for Block Cipher XTS-AES Mode XOR–encrypt–XOR (XEX) Tweakable Modes of Operation: The XTS-AES Mode for Block Cipher with Ciphertext Stealing mode Confdentiality on Block-Oriented Storage Devices SP 800-38F, Recommendation for Block Cipher Key Wrapping Modes of Operation: Methods for Key Wrapping SP 800-56A, Recommendation for Pair-Wise Key DH and MQV Key Agreement Schemes and Key Establishment Schemes Using Discrete Logarithm Confrmation Cryptography, dated March 2007 SP 800-56A, Key Derivation Functions for Key All of SP 800-56A schemes without the Key Derivation Agreement Schemes: All sections except Section Functions (KDF) 5.8 SP 800-56A, Section 5.7.1.2 Elliptic Curve SP 800-56A Section 5.7.1.2 ECC CDH function Cryptography Cofactor Dife-Hellman (ECC CDH) Primitive Testing SP 800-108, Recommendation for Key Derivation Key-Based Key Derivation functions (KBKDF) using Pseudorandom Functions Application-Specifc Key Derivation functions (ASKDF) (includes the KDFs used by Internet Key Exchange (IKE) v1, IKEv2, Transport Layer Security (TLS), American SP 800-135 (Revision 1) Recommendation for National Standard (ANS) X9.63-2001, Secure Shell (SSH), Existing Application-Specifc key Derivation Secure Real-time Transport Protocol (SRTP), Simple Functions Network Management Protocol (SNMP), and Trusted Platform Module (TPM) Component test – ECDSA Signature Generation of a hash value (This component test verifes the signing of a hash- FIPS 186-4, Digital Signature Standard (DSS), and sized input. It does not verify the hashing of the original ANS X9.62 message to be signed.) Component test – RSA PKCS#1 1.5 Signature Generation FIPS 186-4, Digital Signwature Standard (DSS), of encoded message (EM) (This component test verifes and Public Key Cryptography Standards (PKCS) #1 the signing of an EM. It does not verify the formatting of v2.1: RSA Cryptography Standard-2002 the EM.) SP 800-56B, Recommendation for Pair-Wise Component test – RSA PKCS#1 Probabilistic Signature Key Establishment Schemes Using Integer Scheme (PSS) Signature Generation of encoded message 71 Factorization Cryptography, August 2009, Section EM (This component test verifes the RSASP1 function.) 7.1.2 NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017In the future, the CAVP expects to add algorithm The test requirements for SCAP 1.2 are defned validation testing for: in NISTIR 7511, Security Content Automation Protocol (SCAP) Version 1.2 Validation Program • SP 800-38G, Recommendation for Block Test Requirements. In general, vendors may opt for Cipher Modes of Operation: Methods for product validation for one or more SCAP capabilities Format-Preserving Encryption; or operating systems. Currently, the program ofers testing on Microsoft Windows, Red Hat Enterprise • SP 800-56C, Recommendation for Key Linux, and Apple Mac OS platforms. The validation Derivation through Extraction-then-Expansion; process starts when a vendor voluntarily submits • SP 800-132, Recommendation for Password- an SCAP-enabled product to an NVLAP-accredited Based Key Derivation Part 1: Storage laboratory. Once the lab completes product testing, Applications; and the lab submits a test report to the SCAP Validation Program at NIST for review. NIST reviews the test • SP 800-56A Revision 2, Recommendation for report and awards a validation if all requirements Pair-Wise Key Establishment Schemes Using have been met. Once a validation is awarded, the Discrete Logarithm Cryptography. SCAP Validation Record is sent to the lab, and the information about the newly validated product is FOR MORE INFORMATION, SEE: posted on the SCAP Validated Products web page. https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/cryptographic- Figure 26 illustrates the SCAP 1.2 Validation Process. algorithm-validation-program CONTACTS: Mr. Harold Booth Ms. Elaine Barker (301) 975-8441 (301) 975-2911 harold.booth@nist.gov elaine.barker@nist.gov (Editors’ Note: Sharon Keller worked on this program until her recent retirement.) Security Content Automation Protocol (SCAP) Validation Program The SCAP Validation Program performs conformance testing to ensure that products correctly implement SCAP, as defned in SP 800-126 Revision 2, Credit: Shutterstock/Rawpixel.com The Technical Specifcation for the Security Content Automation Protocol (SCAP): SCAP Version 1.2. Computer monitor displaying Conformance testing is necessary because SCAP is a that a product has been tested. complex collection of eleven individual specifcations that work together to support various use cases. A single error in product implementation could result in undetected vulnerabilities or policy noncompliance within an organization’s networks. 72 ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017SCAP 1.2 Validation Process ----------F 2 Vendor selects a lab 3 Lab tests product for and submits the SCAP Product product for testing. NVLAP Accredited conformance to SCAP 1.2 using the derived Vendor SCAP Lab test requirements in NIST IR 7511 and (D completes a test Vendor develops SCAP enabled product and report . uses the publicly available validation Lab submits the test test content during reportto NISTfor quality assurance validation. testing. of validation award and sends the validation record. ® 0 NI ST reviews the test NISTa dds the product report and awards NISTSCAP to the SCAP Validated validation for products Validation Program Product list. meeting the requirements defined in NIST IR 7511. Figure 26: SCAP 1.2 Validation Process All resources and information necessary for and fnd products that have been awarded validations. preparing products for SCAP 1.2 validation are The validation records that are posted on the SCAP published on the SCAP Validation Program web page Validated Products page identify the product versions (see https://scap.nist.gov/validation). The most current that were tested in the laboratory, along with details NISTIR 7511 revision, as well as SCAP capabilities and about each validation, such as the tested platforms, supported platforms, are available on the home page SCAP capabilities, the validation test suite version, (see https://scap.nist.gov/validation). The resources and the lab that performed the product test. page includes documentation, a list of Frequently In FY 2017, NISTIR 7511 was updated in Asked Questions (FAQ), the SCAP validation-test preparation for testing conformance to SCAP 1.3, content, and tools for validating and processing and the validation test content was updated to SCAP data streams. The SCAP validation-test content include test coverage for SCAP 1.3 and support for should be used by vendors for quality assurance new platforms. Support for Microsoft Windows 10 testing prior to entering formal SCAP testing with an and Mac OS 10.11 was released in FY 2017; updates NVLAP-accredited laboratory. The open-source tools for SCAP 1.3 will be released in FY 2018. that are available for download may be used by SCAP content authors for testing the SCAP source content. Vendors continued to beneft from the openly The SCAP Content Validation Tool (SCAPVal) may available SCAP validation test suite reference be used to determine if the content conforms to the material. Access to the validation test suite enables SCAP specifcation. SCAP validated products may vendors to test products during development and provides a means for verifying SCAP conformance be used to process SCAP data streams for use cases after operational products are patched. Through the such as checking compliance of target systems to a use of the reference materials, vendors that market confguration checklist. their products to federal agencies may better End users may use information on the SCAP prepare for formal validation testing with NVLAP 73 Validation web page to learn about SCAP validation accredited laboratories. Vendors focused on the NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017critical infrastructure, and for which formal validation Contractors. There are three companion technical testing may not be required, have access to reference documents: material that ensures that scanning products are 1. SP 800-73, Interfaces for Personal Identity correctly processing SCAP content. Approximately Verifcation; 86 % of confguration scanning products are SCAP- validated, and SCAP product vendors continue to 2. SP 800-76, Biometric Specifcations for engage with the SCAP Validation Program on new Personal Identity Verifcation; and releases of the validation test content. The current list of SCAP 1.2-validated products may be found on the 3. SP 800-78, Cryptographic Algorithms and Key SCAP Validated Products list at https://nvd.nist.gov/ Sizes for Personal Identity Verifcation. scap/validated-tools. The two main products are: the PIV Card In FY 2018, NISTIR 7511 for SCAP 1.3 and the Application and the PIV Middleware. The guidelines for associated validation test suite reference material will performing the conformance tests for these products be released. In addition, the program will continue to are themselves outlined in two technical documents add support for new platforms (i.e., Windows Server (SP 800-85A, PIV Card Application and Middleware 2016 and Mac OS 10.12). The program will continue Interface Test Guidelines (SP 800-73-4 Compliance), to collaborate with vendors, laboratories, and the and SP 800-85B, PIV Data Model Test Guidelines); Security Automation team on updating validation they specify a two-step process that frst involves resources in a meaningful way that meets the needs the development of Derived Test Requirements of federal agencies and the critical infrastructure. (DTRs) and then the actual test procedures. To Coordination with the Security Automation team implement these tests and to generate conformance ensures that validation resources are developed and test reports, CSD also developed test modules for released in conjunction with new releases of SCAP. testing the PIV card application and PIV middleware. These modules were provided to NPIVP test facilities FOR MORE INFORMATION, SEE: for testing and certifying the vendor submissions in https://scap.nist.gov/validation/ the two PIV product categories. NPIVP test facilities are Cryptographic and Security Testing (CST) CONTACT: Laboratories that were accredited by the NVLAP. Mr. Michael Cooper NPIVP also assisted NVLAP in the accreditation (301) 975-8077 of laboratories by developing technology-focused michael.cooper@nist.gov assessment criteria. An additional software module to perform conformance testing for the PIV data model (Editors’ Note: Melanie Cook supported this program was also developed by CSD to enable GSA to provide until her recent departure from NIST.) a toolkit to agencies for testing fully personalized PIV cards prior to card issuance. FIPS 201 specifes the architecture and technical IDENTITY AND ACCESS requirements for the PIV cards. Since the start of the MANAGEMENT NPIVP, FIPS 201 has undergone two revisions and the companion technical documents even more revisions. The two test guidelines documents have also been NIST Personal Identity Verifcation updated to be consistent with the specifcation documents. The NPIVP team was fully involved in the Program (NPIVP) review, analysis and development of these revisions The objective of the NIST Personal Identity of specifcation documents and have also ensured Verifcation Program (NPIVP) is to validate Personal that these revisions are fully refected in the two test Identity Verifcation (PIV) products for conformance guidelines documents as well as in the test software to the specifcations in FIPS 201, Personal Identity modules. The latest versions of all documents (as of Verifcation (PIV) of Federal Employees and September 2017) with their URLs, as well as the URL 74 ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017for the list of accredited NPIVP labs are given below: and inconsistencies in software codes performing the same functionality and to make the maintenance Specifcation Documents: of the overall toolkit much easier. Further tests pertaining to diferent card interfaces (Contact, • FIPS 201-2, Personal Identity Verifcation (PIV) Contactless, Secure Messaging and Virtual Contact) of Federal Employees and Contractors – (see for the same command were grouped together for https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/FIPS/NIST. easy accessibility. The redesigned test toolkit (now FIPS.201-2.pdf) called the SP 800-73-4 PIV Test Runner for PIV Card Applications, Middleware and Data Model) has • SP 800-73-4 Parts 1-3, Interfaces for been made freely available to the public and can be Personal Identity Verifcation (see https://doi. downloaded at https://csrc.nist.gov/Projects/NIST- org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-73-4) Personal-Identity-Verifcation-Program/Software- • SP 800-76-2, Biometric Specifcations for Downloads. Personal Identity Verifcation (see https://doi. NPIVP’s PIV Card Application Validation List org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-76-2) is available at https://csrc.nist.gov/Projects/NIST- • SP 800-78-4, Cryptographic Algorithms and Personal-Identity-Verifcation-Program/Validation- Key Sizes for Personal Identity Verifcation Lists/PIV-Card-Application-Validation-List. (see https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST. The PIV Middleware Validation List is available at SP.800-78-4) https://csrc.nist.gov/Projects/NIST-Personal-Identity- Test Guidelines Documents: Verifcation-Program/Validation-Lists/SP-800-73-4- PIV-Middleware-Validation-List. • SP 800-85A-4, PIV Card Application and Middleware Interface Test Guidelines (SP During FY 2017, fve PIV card application products 800-73-4 Compliance) (see https://doi. were certifed and validated. org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-85A-4) FOR MORE INFORMATION, SEE: • Draft SP 800-85B-4, PIV Data Model Test https://csrc.nist.gov/Projects/NIST-Personal-Identity- Guidelines (see https://csrc.nist.gov/CSRC/ Verifcation-Program media/Publications/sp/800-85b/4/draft/ documents/sp800_85b-4_draft.pdf) CONTACTS: Dr. Ramaswamy Chandramouli List of Accredited NPIVP Labs (301) 975-5013 mouli@nist.gov As of September 2017, there are six accredited NPIVP labs (see https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/nist- Ms. Hildegard Ferraiolo s-personal-identity-verifcation-program/testing- (301) 975-6972 facilities). hildegard.ferraiolo@nist.gov During FY 2017, NPIVP did a major redesign of the test software modules. The three software modules for PIV card application conformance testing, PIV Middleware conformance testing and PIV data model conformance testing were all integrated into a single comprehensive toolkit to eliminate redundancies 75 NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017Personal Identity Verifcation (PIV) issuance and use of PIV Credentials on mobile devices using commercial technologies. For more information visit https://nccoe.nist.gov/ projects/building-blocks/piv-credentials. • Coordinated cybersecurity-related updates with vendors, departments and agencies to ease migration to stronger cryptography for identity credentials and for a PIV system that produces, manages, and uses the credential -- to include the sunset of the Triple Data Encryption Algorithm (TDEA), the upgrade to Deterministic Random Number Generator (DRBG). In FY 2018, CSD will continue to focus on updating the relevant publications associated with FIPS 201-2, including fnalizing SP 800-116 Revision 1. CSD will also Figure 27: Government Employees Use continue to provide technical and strategic inputs to PIV Cards for Facility Access the PIV-related initiatives. In response to Homeland Security Presidential FOR MORE INFORMATION, SEE: Directive-12 (HSPD-12), Policy for a Common https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/piv Identifcation Standard for Federal Employees and Contractors, the following NIST standard was CONTACTS: developed, FIPS 201, Personal Identity Verifcation Dr. Ramaswamy Chandramouli (PIV) of Federal Employees and Contractors. FIPS (301) 975-5013 201 was approved by the Secretary of Commerce in mouli@nist.gov February 2005. HSPD-12 called for the creation of a new identity credential for federal employees and Ms. Hildegard Ferraiolo contractors. FIPS 201 is the technical specifcation for (301) 975-6972 both the PIV identity credential and the PIV system hildegard.ferraiolo@nist.gov that produces, manages, and uses the credential. Within NIST’s ITL, this work is a collaborative efort of the CSD and the IAD. CSD activities in FY 2017 directly Access Control and Privilege supported the latest revision of FIPS 201 (i.e., FIPS 201- Management 2) by updating the relevant publications associated with FIPS 201-2 and by initiating implementations With the advance of the current computing of the credential on mobile devices. CSD performed technologies and the diverse environments in which the following activities during FY 2017 in support of they are used, access control issues, such as situational HSPD-12: awareness, trust management, the preservation of privacy, and privilege-management systems, • Coordinated with the revision team in the are becoming increasingly complex. This project is ACD to update SP 800-63, titled The Digital intended to provide practical and conceptual guidance Identity Guidelines, and ensured close for these issues. alignment with the PIV Standard in areas of enrollment, identity proofng, authentication In FY 2017, the following activities were and credential lifecycle management. accomplished: • With industry CRADA partners, built sample • Published a conference paper: Access Control solutions at the NCCoE to demonstrate the for Distributed Processing Systems: Use Cases 76 ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017and General Considerations, which discussed of shared resources and common trust- fundamental requirements as well as some management schemes; general access control implementations for • Provide guidance for implementing AC distributed system environments. models and mechanisms for standalone or • Continued working on attribute considerations network systems; for access mechanism implementation; the • Increase the security and safety of static results will be presented in the internal draft of (connected) distributed systems by applying a NIST SP, Attribute Consideration for Access the testing and verifcation tool for the AC Control Systems (no publication number has policies; been assigned to this internal draft SP), which is scheduled to be released during FY 2018). • Assist system architects, security administrators, and security managers whose • Added new functions in NIST’s Access Control expertise is related to AC or privilege policy Policy Tool (ACPT) for efciently combining in managing their systems and in learning the access control policies for systems that require limitations and practical approaches for their multi-policy access control. applications; and • Researched a general Access Control (AC) • Provide accurate and efcient fault detection framework for distributed systems, including and correction technology for implementing Big Data, Cloud, IoT, and the Smart Grid. AC rules and policies. In FY 2018, CSD will continue the above research. Figure 28 illustrates the application of AC CSD expects that this project will: and privilege management within and among • Promote (or accelerate) the adoption of organizations. community computing that utilizes the power Gov'tOrg.A Gov'tOrg.B Gov'tOrg.C Environmental Authoritative Authoritative Authoritative Conditions Attribute Attribute Attribute Store Store Store Policy Decision Web Point (PDP) lnformaton Portal Sevrer Responseto ResourcRe equesrA Aurlioriud Access to Rtsourct Rtsponst to Rtsourct Rtqutst 8 Autllori7edA ccesst o Rl'"-O(JKf' Respomf' to Rt'i.ourceR eq,~'i.t C Policy Enforcement Autlwrized Acc,m to Resource Point (PEP) Gov'tOrg . A Gov'tOrg . B Gov't Org.C User Terminals User Terminals User Terminals Integrated w/ Web Integrated w / Web Integrated w/ Web Resource Information Portal Information Portal Information Portal GUI/Client GUI/Client GUI/Client Application Application Application ResourceR equtstB Refoutce RequtstC ResourceR equesrA 77 Figure 28: Access Control and Privilege Management NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017CONTACTS: the verifcation or test processes to generate fault reports. Even though correct verifcation is achieved, Dr. Vincent Hu Mr. David Ferraiolo and counter-examples may be generated when faults (301) 975-4975 (301) 975-3046 are found, those methods provide no information vhu@nist.gov david.ferraiolo@nist.gov about the source of faults that might allow conficts in privilege assignment, the leakage of privileges, or Mr. Rick Kuhn (301) 975-3337 a confict-of-interest in permissions. The difculty in kuhn@nist.gov fnding the source of faults is increased, especially when the AC rules are intricately covering duplicated variables to a degree of complexity. The complexity is Conformance Verifcation for Access because a fault might not be caused by one particular Control Policies access rule but by multiple rules that confict. Thus, it requires manually analyzing each rule in the policy to Access control (AC) systems are among the fnd the correct solution for correcting the fault. most critical network security components. Faulty policies, misconfgurations, or faws in software To address the issue, CSD developed the ACPT, implementation can result in serious vulnerabilities. shown in Figure 29, which allows a user to compose, The specifcation of AC policies is often a challenging verify, test, and generate access control policies. CSD problem. Often, a system’s privacy and security also researched the AC Rule Logic Circuit Simulation are compromised due to the misconfguration of (ACRLCS) technique, which enables the AC authors to AC policies, instead of the failure of cryptographic detect a fault when the fault-causing AC rule is added primitives or protocols. This problem becomes to the policy, so the fx can be implemented in real increasingly severe as software systems become time before adding other rules that further complicate more and more complex, and are deployed to the detecting efort, rather than checking by retracing manage a large amount of sensitive information the interrelations between rules after the policy is and resources that are organized into sophisticated completed. structures. Identifying discrepancies between policy In FY 2017, CSD accomplished the following: specifcations and their intended properties is crucial because the correct implementation and enforcement • Published SP 800-192, Verifcation and Test of policies by applications is based on the premise that Methods for Access Control Policies/Models, the policy specifcations are correct. As a result, policy an article, Access Control Policy Verifcation specifcations must undergo rigorous verifcation and in IEEE Computer, and a conference paper, validation through systematic testing to ensure that Diferentiation Non-Isomorphic Graphs for the policy specifcations truly encapsulate the desires Graph Analytics; of the policy authors. • Enhanced the capability of ACPT by including To formally and precisely capture the security additional functions for the specifcations properties that AC should adhere to, access control of subject inheritance, separation of duty models are usually written to bridge the rather wide requirements, and better user interfaces for gap in abstraction between policy and mechanism. policy model specifcation; Thus, an AC model provides unambiguous and precise expression as well as a reference for the design and • Enhanced the usability and fxed bugs of the implementation of security requirements. Techniques ACRLCS (the Access Control Rule Logic Circuit are required for verifying whether an AC model is Simulation System) to provide more policy correctly expressed in the AC policies, and whether composing and user interface capability for the properties are satisfed in the model. policy fault detection; Most research on AC model or policy verifcation • Supported two Small Business Innovation techniques is focused on one particular model, and Research (SBIR) Phase II projects for the almost all of the research is in applied methods, which access control tool and embeded function 78 require the completed AC policies as the input for developments; and ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017GU/allows specificatfon of users, user attributes, actions, resources, Access Control Policy Tool resources attributes, .-----------------+-------....-.-.-..-.. and properties --- GUI Templates indude.­ ABAC, World/ow, and Multi-Level Generates encoded AC Model Templates Model XACML policy ......................................0...i.ns.ta. .n.ce. .... Validates models Model Checker LJ against properties ~-------~ Generates test swtes Generates -- -+--+-• Combinatorial {~~ combinatorial test Array Generator ~--~_:_~t_e sr_~;__!e_r_~ ·································· I array Figure 29: Access Control Policy Tool (ACPT) • Worked with industrial and academic Figure 29 shows the system architecture of the rganizations in exploring new capabilities that NIST ACPT, which allows access control policy authors helped to improve the usability of the AC tools to compose, verify, and test access control policy (ACPT and ACRLCS), resulting in additional implementation. usage; ACPT was downloaded by 475 users Figure 30 provides an example of access control and organizations. rule implementation in ACRLCS, which allows the In FY 2018, CSD is planning to conduct further online detection of access control rule composition research on efcient testing technology, develop new faults. capabilities, and to enhance the performance of the ACPT and ACRLCS. Tu In To In Top Secret Permission So In Cu In Read In Co In Confidential Permission 79 Figure 30: Access Control Rule Implementation NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017This project is expected to: to perform a set of operations is determined by evaluating the attributes associated with the subject, • Provide a generic paradigm and framework of object, requested operations, and, in some cases, access control model/property conformance environmental conditions against policy, rules, or testing; relationships that describe the allowable operations for a given set of attributes. For example, access to a • Provide templates for specifying access database could be restricted to users with particular control rules in popular access control models, attributes, such as membership in a group (e.g., such as the Attribute Based, Multi-level, and employees) and other conditions (e.g., part of the Workfow models; Human Resource Department). ABAC represents a • Provide tools or services for checking the point on the spectrum of logical access control, from security and safety of an access control simple access control lists to more capable Role Based implementation, policy combination, and Access Control (RBAC), and fnally, to a highly fexible eXtensible Access Control Markup Language method for providing access based on the evaluation (XACML) policy generation; of attributes. • Promote (or accelerate) the adoption of CSD is conducting research that provides combinatorial testing for large-system testing information for using ABAC to improve information (such as an access control system); sharing within and among organizations based on the planning, design, implementation, and operational • Promote the concept of detecting AC policy considerations. The research also includes technologies faults in real-time AC rule composing; such as attribute assurance, attribute engineering/ management, identity system integration, attribute • Provide an innovative method for specifying federation, situational awareness (real-time or AC rules formed by Boolean logic expressions contextual) mechanisms, policy management, and operated on variables of AC rules; natural-language policy translation to digital policy. • Provide techniques for preventing faults in Figure 31 illustrates the interaction of many of these enforcing fundamental security properties, components. including Cyclic Inheritance, Privilege The goal of this research is to improve information Escalation, and Separation of Duty; and sharing, while maintaining control of that information • Provide new methods for composing standard for federal agencies. mandatory AC models, such as Attribute In FY 2017, the project team: Based Access Control (ABAC) and Multi-Level Security (MLS) as well as some fundamental • Published the book Attribute-Based Access security properties. Control by Artech House. The book contains discussions covering almost all aspects of FOR MORE INFORMATION, SEE: ABAC; https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/access-control-policy- tool • Published a conference paper: Verifcation of Resilience Policies that Assist Attribute Based CONTACTS: Access Control. The paper presents research Dr. Vincent Hu Mr. Rick Kuhn results of access privilege blocking and (301) 975-4975 (301) 975-3337 privilege leaking; and vhu@nist.gov kuhn@nist.gov • Worked with government, industry and academic organizations in exploring diverse Attribute Based Access Control models (e.g., Next Generation Access Control - NGAC) and applications (e.g., distributed Attribute Based Access Control (ABAC) is a logical systems: Cloud, Bigdata, IoT applications) of 80 access control methodology where an authorization ABAC. ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017Enterprise Access Control ~ Enterprise Policy Repository ~....v ~ olicy Manager LocalA ccessC ontrol ~------ , PolicyR epository , , I ,, , ~ ~,,' Hierarchical Policy Enterprise Access Control Pushed to Subordinate Policy Administration Point Optional Enterprise <-_ _ ---Or-ga-niz-at-ion-s Policy Decision Service --- ~------- Enterprise Identity/ 1 I Credential Manager ' ' Local Access Control Policy 1 Environment Administration Point \ \ Credenital lnssuance Conditions \ Subject \ \ Object Attribute Issuance \ \ -----+ \ \ A Optional Enterprise \ \ Subject : Object Attribute Binding 1 \ ~ ABAC" iV iI and Validation Service Access Enterprise Subject ~ Control Attribute I,:.,,~ Mechanism ~ Administration Point Enterprise Subject Enterprise Object Attribute Sharing Attribute Manager ,. , ,7 LocalS ubject Object '{",,, ' Attribute Attribute Set of Available Repository Repository Attribute s for Policy Development I Local Object Attribute Local Subject Attribute ____________________A_d_m_in_is_tr_at_io_n_ _P_oi_nt_ _ JI Administration Point Figure 31: ABAC Access Control Mechanism Chart In FY 2018, CSD will continue the research of ABAC • Assist ABAC administrators in establishing or formal models, as well as the details and extended refning business processes to support ABAC; topics of ABAC capabilities, such as attribute • Promote the adoption of ABAC for a more considerations, ABAC implementation examples, secure and fexible method for information ABAC mechanisms, and ABAC standards. The ABAC sharing in a standalone or enterprise project will pursue the following objectives: environment; and • Provide readers with an overview of the • Provide testing methods for ABAC policy and current state of logical access control, implementations. a working defnition of ABAC, and an explanation of the core and enterprise ABAC FOR MORE INFORMATION, SEE: concepts; https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/abac/ • Assist security policy makers in establishing a CONTACTS: business case for ABAC implementation and acquiring an interoperable set of capabilities; Dr. Vincent Hu Mr. David Ferraiolo (301) 975-4975 (301) 975-3046 • Assist ABAC developers in developing vhu@nist.gov david.ferraiolo@nist.gov the operational requirements and overall enterprise architecture; Mr. Rick Kuhn 81 (301) 975-3337 kuhn@nist.gov NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017Trusted Identities Program and to align with international standards. One of the most signifcant updates is replacing levels of By promoting the government and commercial assurance with three individual components of the adoption of privacy-enhancing, secure, interoperable, digital identity fow for more fexibility in design and and easy-to-use digital identity solutions, ACD works operations: the identity, authenticator, and federation alongside its partners to drive trust, convenience, and assurance levels. Identity proofng was also updated innovation in the marketplace of identity solutions to further mitigate the potential for mass breaches of (see https://www.nist.gov/itl/tig). ACD is committed personal information. to advancing measurement science, technology, and Over the course of a year, the document evolved standards adoption to improve digital identity for with the help of the community. For this revision, individuals and organizations alike. GitHub was used to interact in near-real-time with In FY 2017, the Trusted Identities Program was a the community and received a tremendous response: key participant and driving force in the digital identity over 1,400 comments were submitted, and the web arena for NIST’s National Cybersecurity Center of version of the publication drew over 74,000 unique Excellence (NCCoE). Many identity-related projects visitors between May 2016 and May 2017. ACD will initiated at the NCCoE leveraged the technical continue to use this approach in the future during the expertise and experiences of, and the foundational development of new volumes and document revisions. guidelines and practices issued by, ACD and NIST’s broader identity program. International Standards Alignment Through these collaborative eforts, projects this year focused on driving the adoption of trusted ACD, the United Kingdom Cabinet Ofce, and the identities through digital identity standards, including Canada Treasury Board have been collaborating to for federal agencies. NIST also engaged the community compare national frameworks for identity assurance on standards and guidelines development, including with the intention of creating a broad and competitive issuing SP 800-63-3, Digital Identity Guidelines, global market for identity solutions and enabling collaborating with other countries to advance high- cross-border credential interoperability. Building on assurance online identity standards, and participating recent updates to guidance documents like NIST’s in the OpenID Foundation and Fast Identity Online SP 800-63-3 and the UK’s Good Practice Guides, (FIDO) Alliance. the group made several recommendations for the International Organization for Standardization’s ACD also focused on building trust in digital (ISO’s) suite of identity standards. These identity technologies by advancing measurement recommendations included the development of a new science in the identity space—which included standard that provides an overall approach to identity measuring the strength of authenticators and and authentication risk management and assurance; evaluating attribute metadata. The team also organizations could leverage this when developing continued work with numerous external partners their models for assessing and managing identity- through trusted identities pilots, seeding the market based risks and threats. with innovative technologies and providing solutions. The group also recommended refocusing ISO/IEC 29115, Entity Authentication Assurance Framework, to address authentication threats and risks exclusively. Updated Digital Identity Guidelines These updates should contain a threat model, controls In June of 2017, ACD fnalized the latest revision and mitigations, and guidance on how these can to SP 800-63-3, which covers digital identity from be combined to achieve defned risk management initial risk assessment to deployment of federated outcomes for authentication events. identity solutions. Digital identity in both agencies NIST staf members served as the Federal and the market place have changed dramatically Government lead for all activities in the (Fast IDentity since the publication’s last revision in 2013; the latest 82 Online) FIDO Alliance, which focuses on creating update was designed to give agencies more options ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017strong authentication specifcations to create an ACD has advanced trusted digital identity identity ecosystem. During 2017, ACD participation solutions by building partnerships that stem from included active membership and contribution in the trusted identities pilots. These pilots develop technical and privacy working groups, as well as and deploy technology, models, and frameworks international plenary participation in Hong Kong, that would not otherwise exist in the marketplace, Vancouver, Madrid, and Sydney. and have impacted more than 8.8 million individuals to date. In FY 2017, the pilots made remarkable Additionally, ACD supported standardization progress: the 24 projects now involve more than 190 eforts including iGov (see https://openid.net/wg/ partner organizations across 12 sectors — including igov). The iGov is working toward an OpenID Connect the development or deployment of 16 multi-factor specifcation that will enable users to authenticate and authentication solutions. share consented attribute information with public- sector services across the globe. The resulting profle In FY 2018, NIST, through the NCCoE, will fully will enable standardized integration with public-sector integrate identity management standards, best relying parties (RPs) in multiple jurisdictions. practices, and technical approaches into projects that are foundational to the work of the NCCoE and many of its stakeholders and projects, including the Internet Authenticator Strength of Function of Things. The project will also continue to advance the digital identity marketplace by collaborating with NIST is working to produce a framework partners on measurement science, technology, and for evaluating and comparing the strength of standards adoption, and develop guidance to meet authentication solutions, starting with the Strength of today’s digital identity needs. Function for Authenticators – Biometrics (SOFA-B). The team began with a focus on biometrics, due to FOR MORE INFORMATION, SEE: the increased availability of biometric solutions in the https://www.nist.gov/itl/tig consumer space and the need for improved security guidance regarding the use of those solutions as CONTACTS: authenticators. The end goal is a framework to Dr. Nelson Hastings assess and combine authentication technologies, as (301) 975-5237 well as to compare biometrics’ efectiveness to that nelson.hastings@nist.gov of passwords and other authenticators. Using the SOFA-B framework, RPs will be able to determine Ms. Kristina Rigopoulos the overall strength of biometric authentication, (202) 309-4791 considering matching performance, presentation kristina.rigopoulos@nist.gov attack detection, and the efort required to break – or spoof – a system. (Editors’ Note: Paul Grassi supported this program until his recent departure from NIST.) With the draft of NISTIR 8112: A Proposed Schema for Evaluating Federated Attributes, the TIG aims to give RPs greater insight into how attributes assist with risk-based business decision-making. RPs can RESEARCH IN EMERGING examine this metadata and determine if they have TECHNOLOGIES the confdence they need in the attribute value before making an authorization decision. This NISTIR is being treated like an implementers’ draft, an approach Secure Development Toolchain focused on real-world implementation results and lessons learned before fnalizing the document. ACD Competitions plans to advance SOFA-B and attribute metadata eforts to their next stages in FY 2018. Many security weaknesses in federal information systems stem from software security vulnerabilities 83 Innovative Digital Identity Solutions induced by software faws present in current- NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017generation software products. CSD tracks software sets. Through the demonstration of security-faw security vulnerabilities (in the National Vulnerability avoidance in a time-constrained setting, CSD will seek Database), and seeks techniques for the measurement to show that wide-scale improvements in the overall of security vulnerabilities and techniques that reduce security of software products can be realized without the impact and prevalence of security vulnerabilities sacrifcing a time-to-market goal. The competitions, in newly developed products or in new versions of which will be open to all interested parties, will aim existing products. to provide consistent application and measurement of commercial and research software development, One approach to reducing the number of composition, and reuse techniques. security vulnerabilities in software is to improve the development tools that are available. By identifying In FY 2017, CSD personnel documented the languages and software development tools that Toolchain Infrastructure (TCI) in a collection of support a reduction of vulnerabilities, and by documents that included a concept of operations, stimulating the creation of better tools and tool system design specifcation, and administrator’s usage techniques, the approach has the potential and users guides. These documents helped inform to help developers produce applications with fewer the development of a python-based prototype of vulnerabilities. While it is impossible to assure the the TCI. The prototype development efort included total absence of security vulnerabilities in this way, it automated unit test scripts for the TCI and the might well be possible to rule out specifc, signifcant confguration and deployment of the TCI hardware. classes of vulnerabilities that currently provide the The team also refned a selected challenge problem basis for many serious exploits. by updating the problem descriptions, requirements, and test cases; and developed an exemplar challenge CSD is developing an empirical, competitive problem solution in python. approach to fnding the most efective and usable combinations of tools to produce software systems In FY 2018, CSD plans to complete the that are relatively free of exploitable vulnerabilities. development and testing of the TCI prototype. The Multiple competitions are planned that will be based team will enhance the prototype to further improve on an idea developed during the Designing a Secure its reliability and reproducibility, perform extensive Systems Engineering Competition Workshop that was testing of the TCI, and publicly announce the frst conducted by the National Science Foundation in toolchain competition. 2010. The workshop proposed a competition for the CONTACTS: development of a set of tools to help non-security- expert developers to rapidly build a signifcant Mr. Lee Badger Mr. Christopher Johnson application with zero vulnerabilities, as detected by (301) 975-3176 (301) 975-3247 an extensive public test suite. lee.badger@nist.gov christopher.johnson@nist.gov The participants in the planned competitions Networks of Things will implement software systems to solve challenge problems using software development tool chains The Internet of Things (IoT) increasingly appears (“toolchains”) of their own choosing, within specifed to be the next great technology revolution. It is time periods. The toolchains will be free to include expected to impact everything from healthcare existing technologies (e.g., existing software libraries delivery, to how food is produced, to how we work, to and frameworks, code generators, reusable source all forms of transportation and communication, and code, or bug-fnding tools), novel technologies, or to virtually all forms of automation. IoT will impact any combination thereof. Each competition will apply everyone, and in multiple ways. time pressure by simulating a deadline in the software development process, increasing the likelihood of With a technology revolution of such large impact an introduction of security faws. The objective of on society, it is imperative that IoT-based systems the toolchains will be to detect or prevent security can be trusted. This means that they should exhibit faws while still supporting the quick-paced software secure, reliable, and private behaviors as well as many 84 development of applications with rich feature ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017other attributes associated with quality. Privacy is Operations Research and the Management Sciences particularly important because IoT-based systems (INFORMS) meeting in Dallas, Texas, he referred to will likely produce huge amounts of data as a result a cloud as an important new “computing paradigm of sensing and surveillance. This is the “big data” where the boundaries of computing will be determined challenge associated with IoT. Therefore, techniques, by economic rationale rather than technical limits tools, and methods to mitigate the numerous “trust” alone.” The international IT literature and media later challenges are needed before these automated IoT- provided many defnitions, models, and architectures, based networks manage much of daily life. but it was not until 2011, when NIST published SP 800- 145, The NIST Defnition of Cloud Computing, that the In July 2016, NIST released SP 800-183, Networks world coalesced on the cloud deployment and service of ‘Things’, which addressed the question: “What is the models, defnitions and descriptions provided in SP science, if any, underlying IoT?” After releasing that 800-145. document, NIST has begun to look at how to apply the principles in the document in a practical setting, Following the December 2010 Federal with a focus on healthcare. NIST has also looked at Government’s “Cloud First” policy issued as part of the security and privacy of virtual assistants, and how the 25-point plan for the U.S. Federal Government’s a network of things with low inherent testability can (USG) IT modernization and reform, NIST assumed be tested. a technical leadership role for the federal agencies’ eforts related to the adoption and development of Future work in this area will refne the defnitions cloud computing standards. The goal was to accelerate of the fve core networks of things building blocks the Federal Government’s adoption of secure and as presented in SP 800-183. For example, instead of efective cloud computing solutions to reduce costs considering all temperature sensors as equal, NIST will and improve services. create categories of sensors for various applications and vertical domains. Furthermore, a small IoT lab In addition to the initial defnition of cloud to test “low-energy” devices is being architected. computing, NIST built a USG cloud computing In addition, NIST plans to present these results in technology roadmap that focused on security, Revision 1 of SP 800-183, which are expected to be interoperability, and portability requirements, and produced in by the end of 2018. lead eforts to develop standards and guidelines in close collaboration with standards bodies, the private FOR MORE INFORMATION, SEE: sector, and other stakeholders. NIST also developed SP 800-183, Networks of ‘Things’, a cloud computing reference architecture, a security https://dx.doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-183 reference architecture and, during 2017, focused on https://www.nist.gov/topics/internet-things-iot developing the guidance for applying a risk-based approach to cloud adoption and the guidance for CONTACT: leveraging the NIST Cybersecurity Framework in the process of architecting a cloud-based system secured Dr. Jefrey Voas with SP 800-53 Revision 4 security and privacy (301) 975-6622 controls. jef.voas@nist.gov During FY 2017, NIST also researched the security challenges encountered when leveraging application Cloud Computing Security and containers and microservices for the implementation Forensics of cloud-based federal information systems, along with the impact on the system’s security posture. The term “cloud computing” was initially coined Details regarding the latest projects are provided in 1997 by Professor Ramnath Chellappa of Emory below. University. During his talk, Intermediaries in Cloud- Computing, which was presented at the Institute for 85 NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017CSD Role in the NIST Cloud NIST is also leading the research and development of the projects listed below: Computing Program • Members of the NIST Cloud Security Working During FY 2017, NIST continued to promote the Group, in collaboration with the Cloud Security development of publications, national and international Alliance’s members, researched the security standards, and specifcations in support of the USG’s challenges encountered when leveraging efective and secure use of cloud computing, as well application containers and microservices as providing technical guidance to federal agencies for the implementation of cloud-based for secure and efective cloud-computing adoption. information systems. Based on this research, During FY 2017, NIST’s cloud computing security and ITL will publish (in early FY 2018) the NIST forensic science activities included the development Interagency Report (NISTIR) documenting the of the following guidance and/or recommendations: fndings and will provide recommendations based on the best practices for mitigating the • NIST Draft SP 800-173, Guide for Applying the identifed challenges. Risk Management Framework to Cloud-based Federal Information Systems. This publication • Members of the NIST Cloud Security Working initially focused on providing guidance in Group are researching the security challenges using the Risk Management Framework encountered when implementing cloud-based described in SP 800-37 Revision 1, Guide for federated identity solutions and the impact Applying the Risk Management Framework to on the overall system’s security posture. Federal Information Systems: a Security Life Based on this research, NIST will issue an Cycle Approach, to issue an authorization to interagency report documenting the fndings operate for cloud-based information systems. and will provide recommendations based on As SP 800-37 underwent revision in late FY the best practices for mitigating the identifed 2017, and is anticipated to be fnalized in challenges. early FY 2018, the draft of SP 800-173 will be updated to refect all changes incorporated • Members of the NIST Cloud Forensic Science in the SP 800-37 Rev. 2 and will be posted for Working Group are working on defning public comment after publication of SP 800- a cloud forensics reference architecture 37 Rev. 2. that leverages SP 500-299: Cloud Security Reference Architecture and NISTIR 8006, • NIST Draft SP 800-174, Security and NIST Cloud Computing Forensic Science Privacy Controls for Cloud-based Federal Challenges. In support of U.S. cloud- Information Systems. This document provides computing mandates, CSD staf members a methodology that leverages the NIST provide leadership for several public cloud Cybersecurity Framework (CSF) to architect working groups operating under the NIST a cloud-based information system and to Cloud Computing Program. These working identify security controls deemed necessary groups focus on meeting the high-priority to implement in order to secure the system. requirements described in SP 500-293, U.S. The document will be available for public Government Cloud Computing Technology comment in the frst quarter of FY 2018. The Roadmap. document will be accompanied by a tool, Cloud Security Architecture Tool (CSAT), that CSD staf co-chaired several signifcant cloud implements the methodology described in SP computing eforts in 2017: 800-174 and allows users to customize their • Co-Chaired the NIST Cloud Computing data and tailor their security controls. The tool Security Working Group and led the working repository is available at: https://github.com/ group on the development of the NIST usnistgov/CloudSecurityArchitectureTool. research on Application Containers and Microservices – security challenges and 86 ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017best practices. The result of this efort will (IoT) devices in a manner that ensures minimal latency materialize in FY 2018 into the development of across a distributed and decentralized model. a NIST Interagency Report and a NIST Special Researchers working with system and network Publication. engineers are continually developing innovative • Co-Chaired the NIST Cloud Computing solutions to fll the technological gaps. Many of these Forensic Science Working Group and led the solutions or computational paradigms have begun development of SP 800-201, Cloud Forensics to be referred to as fog computing, mist computing, Reference Architecture, which is currently in cloudlets, or edge computing. Lacking broad progress. consensus on the distinction among these concepts, NIST facilitated an efort to better defne these topics • Co-Chaired the NIST Cloud Computing to help facilitate meaningful conversations among Interoperability and Portability Working practitioners and researchers. Group and addressed issues facing cloud computing with respect to interoperability During FY 2017, NIST collaborated with the IoT and portability, standards, and common and community to develop SP 500-325, Fog Computing functional terminologies. CSD staf members Conceptual Model. This publication provides the participated in various standards development conceptual model of fog computing and its subsidiary organizations, all listed in the section of this concept, mist computing, and identifes these report dedicated to international standards. concepts in relation to cloud computing, cloudlets, In FY 2018, NIST will continue collaboration and edge computing. with the private sector, academia and other The fog computing research will continue in FY public-sector entities on developing guidance 2018 with the development of the draft of SP 800- and specifcations that support the broad 199, Security and Privacy Controls for Fog-based adoption of innovative cloud solutions. Some Information Systems. This document, also referred to of the very efective frameworks for such as the fog computing overlay, will identify the security collaborations that NIST is hosting are the and privacy controls specifc to fog computing public working groups, with international ecosystems, allowing users of this computational participation. model to build resilient and survivable standalone FOR MORE INFORMATION SEE: fog computing environments that are more resistant to penetration attacks and are capable of limiting the https://www.nist.gov/itl/cloud damage from attacks when they occur. CONTACT: CONTACTS: Dr. Michaela Iorga Dr. Michaela Iorga Mr. Ned Goren (301) 975-8431 (301) 975-8431 (301) 975-5233 michaela.iorga@nist.gov michaela.iorga@nist.gov nedim.goren@nist.gov Fog Computing NIST Cybersecurity for IoT Program Ubiquitous deployment of smart, interconnected NIST’s Cybersecurity for IoT Program develops devices is estimated to reach as high as 50 billion and applies standards, guidelines, and related tools units by 2020. This exponential increase is fueled to improve the cybersecurity of connected devices by the proliferation of mobile devices (e.g., mobile and the environments in which they are deployed. By phones and tablets), smart sensors serving diferent collaborating among stakeholders across government, vertical markets (e.g., smart power grids, autonomous industry, international bodies, and academia, the transportation, industrial controls, smart cities, program aims to cultivate trust and foster an wearables, etc), wireless sensors and actuators environment that enables innovation. (see https:// networks. New concepts and technologies are needed 87 www.nist.gov/programs-projects/nist-cybersecurity- to manage this growing feet of Internet of Things iot-program). NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017In FY 2017, during the nascent phase of the CONTACTS: Program, the team focused on engaging and Ms. Kat Megas collaborating with stakeholders across government, (202) 441-1147 industry, international bodies, and academia to katerina.megas@nist.gov understand the IoT threat landscape and determine whether there is stakeholder interest in NIST guidance Mr. Ben Piccarreta for securing their IoT ecosystems. To this end, the (202) 802-1861 Program hosted the IoT Cybersecurity Colloquium benjamin.piccarreta@nist.gov in Gaithersburg to better understand the overall threat landscape from the point of view of the Policy Machine – Next Generation community (see https://www.nist.gov/news-events/ events/2017/10/iot-cybersecurity-colloquium). The Access Control presenters discussed specifc security and privacy risks and NIST’s role in supporting these areas. The team CSD has continued the development of an is currently drafting a NISTIR on the presentations, advanced Attribute Based Access Control (ABAC) themes, and community feedback. framework called the Policy Machine, which is designed to be in alignment with an emerging ANSI/ Additionally, NIST and DHS co-chair the IoT Task INCITS standard under the title of “Next Generation Group of the Interagency International Cybersecurity Access Control” (NGAC). Standardization Working Group (IICS WG). The IICS WG established the Task Group to determine The Policy Machine (PM) is a fundamental the present state of international IoT cybersecurity reworking of traditional access control into a form standards. The Task Group has 54 federal employee suited to the needs of a modern, distributed, participants representing 13 agencies and will interconnected enterprise. The PM is based on a convene in early FY 2018 to determine the next steps fexible infrastructure that can provide access control for its draft report. If approved, NIST is prepared to services for several diferent types of resources that take this document through the NISTIR process in FY are accessed by diferent types of applications and 2018 to collect industry input on specifc areas, such users. The PM infrastructure is scalable and can as market adoption and challenges associated with support policies of various types simultaneously the adoption of existing standards. while remaining manageable in the face of changing technology, organizational restructuring, and In FY 2018, the Cybersecurity for IoT Program increasing amounts of data. The PM provides a will continue collaborating with stakeholders as NIST framework capable of supporting combinations of begins drafting guidance for IoT security and privacy. both current access control approaches and newly As part of the drafting process, the team will hold conceived types of policy without extensions. town-hall meetings for input on discussion drafts. The document is intended to educate federal agencies NIST and other members of an Ad Hoc INCITS on common high-level security and privacy risks working group are continuing to develop a three-part for IoT, and to introduce practical risk management NGAC standard. This work is being conducted under considerations for IoT product selection, deployment, three sub-projects: protection, and operation. • Project 2193–D: Next Generation Access Additional information regarding the broad Control – Implementation Requirements, portfolio of NIST activities for supporting secure IoT Protocols and API Defnitions; can be found on our program website. • Project 2194–D: Next Generation Access FOR MORE INFORMATION, SEE: Control – Functional Architecture; and https://www.nist.gov/programs-projects/nist- • Project 2195–D: Next Generation Access cybersecurity-iot-program Control – Generic Operations and Abstract Data Structures. 88 ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017An initial standard from this work was published authentication (if feasible) and some sample in 2013 and is now available from ANSI as INCITS applications (e.g., email, fle management, records 499: NGAC Functional Architecture (NGAC-FA) (see management, document editor, workfow, etc.). http://www.techstreet.com/standards/incits/499_ In FY 2018, CSD will continue improving the Web draft?product_id=1827386). However, based on services version of the Policy Machine to include experience with similar eforts (e.g., Project 2193-D, the remaining NGAC functionalities and more Project 2195-D, and the revised NISTIR 7987, Policy applications to provide diferent use cases to support Machine: Features, Architecture, and Specifcation). the community’s use of the Policy Machine. This standard has been updated and was in the process of formal publication at the end of FY 2017. FOR MORE INFORMATION, SEE: In addition, as of the end of FY 2017, the work on https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/policy-machine/ Project 2193-D had been submitted to ANSI as INCITS CONTACTS: 525: NGAC Implementation Requirements, Protocols and API Defnitions (NGAC-IRPADS), for approval for Mr. David Ferraiolo Ms. Gopi Katwala an initial public review. (301) 975-3046 (301) 975-6182 david.ferraiolo@nist.gov gopi.katwala@nist.gov The standard for Project 2195-D has been approved and is now available from the ANSI e-standards store Security for a Virtualized as INCITS 526: NGAC Generic Operations and Abstract Data Structures (NGAC-GOADS). Infrastructure The eXtensible Access Control Markup The objective of this project is to focus on security Language (XACML) and NGAC are very diferent concerns in virtualization technology; the project ABAC standards with similar goals and objectives. was started at a time when the technology was just What are the similarities and diferences between beginning to gain traction in data centers used for these two standards? What are their comparative supporting enterprise IT applications as well as for advantages and disadvantages? To answer these providing cloud services. An IT infrastructure can be questions, in October 2016 NIST published SP 800- looked upon as having fve components or resources: 178, A Comparison of Attribute Based Access Control Hardware, Operating System (OS), and Applications (ABAC) Standards for Data Service Applications: that collectively form a compute node, together with Extensible Access Control Markup Language (XACML) network and storage components that provide the and Next Generation Access Control (NGAC), function of interconnecting the computing nodes to describe and compare these standards with and supporting a persistent medium for storing respect to the criteria derived from ABAC issues or data respectively. Any of these fve resources can be considerations identifed by SP 800-162, Guide to virtualized by building an abstraction layer on top of Attribute Based Access Control (ABAC) Defnition it, facilitating efcient utilization of that resource by and Considerations: operational efciency, attribute other components or resources as well as providing a and policy management, scope and type of policy degree of isolation among the utilizing components. support, and support for administrative review and resource discovery. The earliest component to be virtualized was the hardware (ubiquitously referred to as Server In FY 2017, CSD issued the frst version of the Virtualization) through an abstraction layer (software Policy Machine Web Services through GitHub as module) called the Hypervisor. This gave rise to an open-source distribution to support widespread an architecture where multiple computing stacks experimentation of web-based applications. The (called Virtual Machines or VMs) each with a diferent current version of the web services supports most OS can be run on a single physical host (called a NGAC functionality. In order to provide an example virtualized host). To connect the various VMs residing of web-based clients, CSD is planning to issue an in a single physical host, an approach to networking administrative interface for policy management, 89 (called the Virtual Network) had to be implemented. which will also include a user interface with PIV The Virtual Network used the software analogs of NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017hardware network devices such as network interface stack with all these new components is shown in cards (NICs) and switches. Thus, the Virtual Network Figure 32 as the Container Technology stack. (which was later extended to connect virtualized With the increasing adoption of application hosts themselves in addition to VMs inside a single container technology for deploying, managing and virtualized host) became an integral part of the server maintaining applications, NIST identifed threats to virtualization infrastructure. From FY 2014 to FY 2016, components involved in supporting containers as well this project focused on providing guidelines for the as the security countermeasures to mitigate the efect secure confguration and deployment of hypervisors of those threats through SP 800-190, Application and virtual networks. Container Security Guide (see https://nvlpubs.nist. The next component to be virtualized was the OS gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.800-190. itself. The application component of the computing pdf). stack was packaged into multiple self-contained In FY 2017, building on the information in SP 800- lightweight software elements called Application 190, this project examined potential security solutions Containers. The abstraction of the OS itself was that provide the necessary countermeasures as well as enabled by a software module called “Container the kind of security assurance requirements that each Runtime”. This form of virtualization brought in solution should satisfy in accordance with NISTIR 8176, several new technology components involved in Security Assurance Requirements for Linux Application building containers, storing them in repositories Container Deployments (see https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/ (called registries) and deploying and managing them nistpubs/ir/2017/NIST.IR.8176.pdf). Because security (through a process called orchestration) as logical solutions for containers vary signifcantly based on groups (called clusters). The resulting computing Application Scheduling Container Scheduling Service Discovery Container Cluster Management Container Networking .g;;;,;;; Container Runtime Container Runtime Container OS Container OS Physical Host (or VM) Physical Host (or VM) DevOps Tools 90 Figure 32: Container Technology Stack ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017the OS component (shown as Container OS in Figure capabilities. Cyber threat information includes 32) and because of their ubiquitous usage in container indicators (i.e., artifacts or observable events that deployments, NISTIR 8176 focused on Linux OS- suggest that an attack is imminent, that an attack is based environments. This decision enabled detailed underway, or that a compromise may have already security assurance requirements to be defned. occurred); information about the tactics, techniques, Furthermore, the team recognized that there are and procedures (TTPs) of actors; recommended multiple hypervisor products for server virtualization courses of action; and other information that is used to in current infrastructures. This observation led the characterize threats. Because threat actors often use team to modify previous security recommendations to the same TTPs against multiple targets, exchanging improve countermeasures against potential threats to cyber threat information allows organizations to the hypervisor. These countermeasures are agnostic leverage the collective knowledge, experience, and to any specifc architecture of the hypervisor platform. analysis capabilities of their peers, thereby increasing The modifed recommendations were published the overall awareness and security of an entire for public comment in the second draft of SP 800- sharing community. Through the exchange of cyber 125A, Security Recommendations for Hypervisor threat information, organizations can gain a more Deployment (see https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/ complete understanding of their threat environment detail/sp/800-125a/draft). by correlating their observations with those of others. NIST contributed signifcant material that led CSD has established a cyber threat information- to the creation of ISO/IEC Committee Draft 21878, sharing initiative, which is focused on providing Security Guidelines for Design and Implementation guidance on how an organization can establish of Virtualized Servers, in April 2017. The draft was co- information sharing and coordination capabilities edited by a CSD computer scientist and drew from that enhance or augment their existing cybersecurity information in seven NIST conference papers and practices. The guidance covers threat-informed four technical publications regarding security for the detection, protection and response capabilities; data virtualized infrastructure. privacy and sensitivity; data collection and retention practices; the use of open standards for information NIST recognizes that application container exchange; de-identifcation and anonymization; technology is being increasingly used to develop and guidance on how an organization can establish, applications with microservices-based architectures. participate in, and maintain coordination and In FY 2018, this project plans to focus on security issues information-sharing relationships. The guidance will arising from technology components involved in that help incident responders, network defenders, and architecture. Developments in virtual networking operations personnel consider what information is and virtual storage technologies will be monitored sharable, the circumstances under which sharing is to update our security recommendations for secure allowed, with whom the information may be shared, deployment of these technologies. and how the information should be protected. CONTACT: In October 2016, CSD published SP 800-150, Guide Dr. Ramaswamy Chandramouli to Cyber Threat Information Sharing. This publication (301) 975-5013 helps organizations prepare for an exchange of mouli@nist.gov cyber threat information, both consuming cyber threat information from external sources and producing information for other organizations to Cyber Threat Information Sharing use. Organizations may have diferent capabilities for detecting threats, responding to attacks, diagnosing As cyber attacks increase in both sophistication causes, and handling sensitive incident-related and frequency, it is important to collect and analyze information, but this guidance is intended to help cyber threat information from a variety of internal organizations collaborate and exchange cyber threat and external sources, and use it to develop, enhance, information despite these organizational diferences. and deploy proactive, threat-informed, cyber defense 91 NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017In May 2017, NIST conducted a Threat Intelligence • Law Enforcement, Working Session as part of the Cybersecurity • Fusion Centers, and Framework Workshop. The working session provided an opportunity for attendees to provide comments on • Sector Coordinating Councils. the use of cyber threat intelligence in the Framework, to help shape future enhancements to the Framework, CONTACTS: and to share experiences regarding the use of cyber Mr. Christopher Johnson Mr. Lee Badger threat intelligence in the Framework. NIST used the (301) 975-3247 (301) 975-3176 feedback received during the workshop and the christopher.johnson@nist.gov lee.badger@nist.gov public review process as input when updating the Cybersecurity Framework Version 1.1 and its roadmap. Mr. David Waltermire (301) 975-3390 Throughout the year, CSD engaged with david.waltermire@nist.gov government, industry, and academia to research protocols, data models, and standards that enable The Ontology of Authentication cyber threat information sharing and support near real-time cybersecurity decision-making and security Over the past 30 years, NIST recommendations operations. have included the usage of passwords, biometrics, In FY 2018, CSD plans to continue to conduct authentication hardware devices, and Public research, prepare guidance, and take part in Key Infrastructure (PKI) solutions for enterprise standards development activities that foster greater authentication applications. Recently, CSD began interoperability and increase the operational tempo researching general authentication features. This through near real-time cyber threat information investigation was prompted by the general call to sharing, including: move away from passwords toward the growing number of alternative authentication methods (e.g., • Expressing cyber threat information using biometrics, smart cards, etc.). A notional ontology machine-readable formats, of authentication is in development that includes a detailed taxonomy and an assessment approach to • Developing automated mechanisms for aid in defnitively comparing alternatives. exchanging cyber threat information, As the research matures, it is possible to draft • Describing automated courses of action, a concept map (see Figure 33) to highlight key • Publishing cyber threat information metadata, components. There are many intertwining aspects of and authentication, such as the relationships with Identity Management and Authorization. As more of the • Safeguarding cyber threat information. aspects of authentication are identifed and defned, better development and use of authentication is NIST will also help foster cyber threat information expected. sharing by supporting information-sharing initiatives by public and private-sector organizations, including: The structure of the authentication taxonomy (see Figure 34) to encapsulate current and emerging • Information Sharing and Analysis Centers mechanisms continues to be refned as recent updates (ISACs), expand the diversity of mechanisms. The taxonomy • Information Sharing and Analysis includes entity authentication as a wide assortment of Organizations (ISAOs), commonly used human-machine, machine-machine, and human-human methods, all of which are termed • Federal/State/Local agencies, confrmation. Attestation is the term used for afrming expectations of objects. 92 ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017- - .. - - ..,   ....~ . Hi\1111:  - HH-  ii+ • - ...  &M+  • - - lib- Figure 33: Draft Authentication Concept Map The notional authentication ontology attempts may overlap or impact the others. Security and to defne an assessment framework that is useful for usability are of special interest; while usability is often better understanding, comparing, and determining thought of as a tradeof to security, both must be the appropriateness of authentication technologies satisfed for the user to support the security of the to a specifc use-case. The assessment framework system. To state the issue another way, there appears separates attributes into security, usability, to be a relation between how much we must ask of the deployability, and manageability categories (see operator and how willing the operator is to support Figure 35). It is important to note that each category security rather than (mis)manage it. Authentication Taxonomy 93 Figure 34: Draft Authentication Taxonomy NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017Cognitive-based Approach to System Security Assessment (CASSA) Deployability The increase in information systems’ complexity, due to the aggregation of broader-spectrum services and functionality within one system, challenges security professionals that are required to plan, analyze, design, implement and maintain systems compliant to Usability Manageability various regulatory requirements supported by diverse sets of security controls, processes and procedures. For example, Veteran Afairs’ hospital systems are often required to meet FISMA, Payment Card Industry (PCI) and Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Figure 35: Suitability Framework for Authentication Act (HIPAA) requirements simultaneously. Assessing and maintaining the security posture of such complex Specifc methods of assessment in these information systems through manual procedures categories are not developed and are expected to leveraging paper-driven approaches is colossal, be unique to each authentication mechanism and inefcient, and often unreliable. dependent on the environment. The assessment framework also includes integration with the NIST is researching methodologies for enhancing programmatic categories of deployability and the security assessment and the near-real-time manageability. What is known is that these are unlikely monitoring of complex systems. The team is leveraging to be reduced to a single value, but will have to be cognitive approaches to provide continuous feedback assessed across several independent constructs. by highlighting relevant threats, rendering security enhancements, or augmenting solutions to maintain/ Future programmatic eforts will be focused increase systems’ security postures. toward a NISTIR to describe the research results, encourage further discussion with the community, During FY 2017, NIST completed a feasibility and provide recommendations for future standards assessment and created the project’s research plan, development eforts. The goal is to move toward identifying milestones and deliverables. In FY 2018 specifying independent strength requirements and subsequent years, the team will continue the rather than specifc implementation requirements. Cognitive-based Approach to Security Controls Upon completion of the NISTIR, work will begin on a Assessment (CASSA) by researching methods to: suitability matrix that will aid the user in determining • Identify the relationships between how best to apply and assess the assessment implemented security and privacy controls for framework. Concerns as to the adoptability of a targeted information system; this approach will be addressed. Additional work to identify interdependencies among identity • Analyze the implementation of the security management and authorization controls and and privacy controls, providing, as feedback, requirements should aid in unifying the approach. As a rendered set of suggestions to enhance the a clear assessment approach is defned, future identity security posture of the system; management, authentication, and authorization process implementations can address vulnerabilities • Identify documented and undocumented of individual or combined solutions. vulnerabilities relevant to the system; CONTACT: • Identify the minimum-resistance penetration path into the system, providing, as feedback, Dr. Kim Schafer rendered recommendations for mitigating the (301) 975-8375 risk; and kim.schafer@nist.gov 94 ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017• Perform continuous monitoring and analysis and a healthcare institution (with Health Insurance of the system, factoring in the above steps Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) while providing rendered suggestions for requirements) that has credit card transactions system enhancements. (with requirements specifed in the Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard (PCI DSS)). There is CONTACTS: no shortage of requirements for some organizations Dr. Michaela Iorga Dr. Dmitry Cousin that have multiple regulatory frameworks. Assessing (301) 975-8431 (301) 975-5727 a plethora of security controls rooted on diferent michaela.iorga@nist.gov dmitry.cousin@nist.gov standards with diferent formatting is a complex process that is currently largely manual or leverages proprietary, specifcally customized approaches and Open Security Controls Assessment tools. Language (OSCAL) OSCAL attempts to standardize how NIST is proposing the development of the Open security controls are represented, how a control Security Controls Assessment Language, or OSCAL, implementation for a given system is represented, a hierarchical, formatted, XML-based (and JSON and how that information is best used. It supports translation) schema that provides a standard for the generation of standardized reports that can be representing diferent categories of information used by both humans and machines. That means pertaining to the publication, implementation, and that formats are needed that can be generated by assessment of security controls. machines for communicating with other machines, but can also be easily reformatted so that humans OSCAL is attempting to address a number of can read the information. By standardizing the challenges around security controls and security representation of this information, OSCAL information controls assessment. The core challenge, and one can be interoperable because of a well-defned of the primary reasons for creating OSCAL, is that specifcation with information that’s going to be used, concepts like security controls and profles are imported, and subsquently used for security control represented today largely in proprietary ways. In assessments. The goal is to keep OSCAL as simple as many cases they are written in prose documents that possible and provide extensive automation for tools are imprecise, lead to diferences in interpretation, it uses. and are not machine-readable, meaning that the prose instructions require someone to do data entry During FY 2017, NIST focused on developing into a tool in order for the tool to use the information. the control catalog schema and the profle schema, focusing on addressing a large number of user stories Organizations are also struggling with information that describe features, attributes or characteristics. systems that have many diferent components, and The team validated the approach with use cases from some components require the use of diferent profles SP 800-53 Rev. 4, SP 800-53 Rev. 5 (draft), ISO/IEC per component, which is commonly the case with 27001 and 27002, and COBIT 5. cloud environments. Also, the cloud environments can be multitenant or have mixed ownership of In the next year, NIST will continue the components. We need to be able to assess the security development of the other schemas pertaining to the of these systems against a number of requirements, project (e.g., the framework schema, implementation owners, etc.—to do this simultaneously and provide schema and System Security Plan (SSP) representation, these views to stakeholders. assessment schema, etc.). In addition, there are situations where a single CONTACTS: system needs to support multiple regulatory Dr. Michaela Iorga Mr. David Waltermire frameworks. For example, the U.S. Department of (301) 975-8431 (301) 975-3390 Veterans Afairs is a federal agency (with Federal michaela.iorga@nist.gov david.waltermire@nist.gov Information Security Modernization Act (FISMA) 95 and NIST Cybersecurity Framework requirements) NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY in a NIST SP 1800 series, a three-volume document that provides applicable guidance CENTER OF EXCELLENCE for executives, CISOs or IT directors, and IT staf. Types of Collaborators & Partnerships The National Cybersecurity Center of Excellence (NCCoE), established in 2012 by NIST in partnership Vendors, industry stakeholders, academic experts with the State of Maryland and Montgomery County, and others participate in the center through a variety Md., is a collaborative hub – convening experts from of collaborative mechanisms as described below: industry, academia, and government to work on critical problems in cybersecurity. The NCCoE’s collaborations • Communities of Interest: A Community of focus on providing practical guidance to technical, Interest (COI) is a group of professionals and real-world cybersecurity challenges using standards- advisors that share business insights, technical based, commercially available technologies. expertise, challenges, and perspectives to guide NCCoE projects. The NCCoE relies on Project Lifecycle this robust collaboration with experts and innovators to provide real-world cybersecurity To help accelerate businesses’ adoption of challenges and inform the reference standards-based, secure technologies, the NCCoE designs for standards-based cybersecurity works collaboratively with stakeholders to: integrations that address business needs. • Defne and articulate: The NCCoE works • Technology Collaborators: Vendors with industry stakeholders, cybersecurity who would like to participate in a center professionals, academic experts, government project reply to a Federal Register call for agencies, and others to identify and defne participation. Vendors who are chosen to pressing cybersecurity issues. participate sign a CRADA and contribute • Organize and engage: The NCCoE then their expertise, hardware, or software to the collaborates with stakeholders to refne a reference design for a specifc problem. project’s scope and develop detailed technical • National Cybersecurity Excellence descriptions of the problem. The NCCoE also Partnership (NCEP): The NCCoE also works engages technology vendors via an open with technology vendors via the NCEP call through the Federal Register, to build a program, wherein vendors sign MOUs to potential example solution. establish a deeper partnership with the • Implement and test: The NCCoE works with NCCoE. NCEPs can provide hardware, technology vendors that have standards- software, knowledge, personnel, and can based, commercially available products designate guest researchers to work at the that can be used as part of the example center in person or remotely. The NCCoE implementation. These vendors sign a currently has 31 NCEPs, from Fortune Cooperative Research and Development 50 market leaders to smaller companies Agreement (CRADA) and help build a specializing in IT security. reference design, identify gaps in the build; For more information on NCCoE Partnerships, see and refne the example implementation https://nccoe.nist.gov/partners. until there is a practical, usable, repeatable reference design that addresses the business SP 1800 Series: Practical Cybersecurity problem. Guidance • Publish and transfer: The NCCoE provides NCCoE projects result in a NIST Special Publication details of the reference design, standards (SP) 1800 document – a three-volume practice guide, mapping, lab implementation, and more which is a complement to NIST’s SP 800 series 96 ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017documents. SP 1800 documents contain an Executive intentionally or otherwise, can expose a healthcare Summary for business executives, a second volume delivery organization to serious risks, including for security program managers that details security breaches of protected health information, loss or approaches and maps security capabilities to the NIST disruption of healthcare services, damage to an Cybersecurity Framework as well as other relevant organization’s reputation, productivity, and revenue, standards, and a third volume for the cybersecurity or even loss of life. implementation staf that details the steps needed The NCCoE worked with a community-of-interest for another entity to recreate the NCCoE’s example made up of various components of the healthcare solution. ecosystem to defne the challenge of using wireless In FY 2017, the center published seven practice infusion pumps securely, identify relevant standards guides (up from two in FY 2016 and three in FY 2015) and best practices, and create a representative that provide practical guidance, including a reference architecture. design and implementation details, on standards- The NCCoE then developed a lab implementation based secure technologies: to demonstrate how healthcare delivery organizations 1. SP 1800-3, Revision 2, Attribute Based can use standards-based, commercially available Access Control; cybersecurity technologies and industry best practices. Working with fve major infusion pump 2. SP 1800-6, DNS-Based Email Security; manufacturers, which accounted for 85 % of the market in America, and innovative cybersecurity 3. SP 1800-7, Situational Awareness for the technology vendors, the NCCoE helped highlight Electric Utilities; where security capabilities could be built into the 4. SP 1800-8, Securing Wireless Infusion pumps to strengthen the cybersecurity of the devices, Pumps in Healthcare Delivery pump ecosystem, and healthcare enterprise. This has Organizations; led to multiple pump manufacturers incorporating security capabilities into the next generation versions 5. SP 1800-9, Managing Access Rights in the of their pumps. Financial Services Sector; Collaborating Across Government 6. SP 1800-11, Data Integrity: Recovering from Ransomware and Other Destructive The NCCoE’s Work for Others (WFO) Program, Events; and governed by the NCCoE’s Program Management Ofce (PMO), facilitates the engagement of other 7. SP 1800-12, Derived Personal Identity agencies with NIST’s National Cybersecurity Federally Verifcation (PIV) Credentials. Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC). Since 2015, the WFO program has continuously grown For more information about NCCoE projects, visit and currently has several interagency agreements https://nccoe.nist.gov/projects. in place, which support projects for the U.S. Coast Guard, the U.S. Department of Transportation, the U.S. Example: Impact of Guidance on Wireless Infusion Air Force, and the Department of Homeland Security. Pumps Medical devices like infusion pumps were once Example of Government Collaboration: U.S. Coast standalone instruments. Today, infusion pumps Guard and Sector CSF Profles connect wirelessly to a variety of healthcare systems, In early FY 2017, the U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) and networks, and other devices. Connecting infusion industry representatives worked with NIST to develop pumps to point-of-care medication systems and the Maritime Bulk Liquids Transfer Cybersecurity electronic health records can improve healthcare Framework (CSF) Profle. This profle template helps delivery processes, but it also increases cybersecurity organizations in the complex and sophisticated supply risks that could afect operations or safety. Tampering 97 chain of the oil and natural gas industry assess and with the wireless infusion pump ecosystem, whether monitor their cybersecurity risk (see https://www.dco. NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017uscg.mil/Portals/9/CG-FAC/Documents/Maritime_ stakeholders to improve the resilience of the internet BLT_CSF.pdf?ver=2017-07-19-070544-223). Building and communications ecosystem and to encourage on the success of this CSF profle, the USCG asked for collaboration with the goal of dramatically reducing two more profles to be completed: Mobile Of-Shore threats perpetrated by automated and distributed Drilling Units and Passenger Vessels. attacks (e.g., botnets).” The workshop was designed to allow stakeholders to explore a range of current The goal of these profles is to provide maritime and emerging solutions addressing automated, sub-sectors with guidance for applying the CSF, distributed threats in an open and transparent leveraging the framework to create a sub-sector manner. The workshop’s proceedings were detailed profle that individual companies can tailor and use to in NISTIR 8192, published in FY 2017 (see https://csrc. prioritize resources and identify cybersecurity gaps. nist.gov/publications/detail/nistir/8192/fnal). Beyond This project has helped showcase how the NCCoE NISTIR 8192, the workshop led to the launch of two can apply standards and best practices to real-world new NCCoE projects: Mitigating IoT Based Automated industry challenges to help companies more easily Distributed Threats and TLS Server Certifcate take advantage of existing guidance. Management. Workshops & Events Additionally, the regularly held NCCoE Speaker Series showcases thought leaders that highlight critical cybersecurity issues of national importance across various industries. The Speaker Series is jointly hosted by the NCCoE, Maryland Department of Commerce, and Montgomery County Department of Economic Development in collaboration with the Maryland Tech Council. This year, the NCCoE hosted four Speaker Series events, whose topics ranged from how small businesses can utilize the NIST CSF, to cybersecurity threats in the hospitality sector, to the psychology behind insider threats. The NCCoE also hosted multiple in-person workshops with its NCEP partners – in February at the RSA Conference and in September at Juniper Networks’ headquarters in Sunnyvale, CA. Figure 36: The Enhancing Resilience of the Internet The workshops brought together dozens of top and Communications Ecosystem Workshop cybersecurity experts from nearly all the partner organizations to discuss critical cybersecurity Throughout FY 2017, the NCCoE hosted and challenges, from identity to artifcial intelligence, that participated in numerous workshops to defne, refne, may beneft from NCCoE guidance. and provide guidance on technical cybersecurity challenges facing businesses today. Learn more about the NCCoE’s events at https:// nccoe.nist.gov/events. For example, the NCCoE hosted NIST’s Workshop on “Enhancing Resilience of the Internet and Looking Ahead Communications Ecosystem,” which brought together over a hundred cybersecurity technologists, vendors, Building on the robust stakeholder engagement researchers, and subject matter experts. Executive seen in FY 2017, the NCCoE expects to accelerate the Order 13800, “Strengthening the Cybersecurity of number of projects undertaken in FY 2018, reinforcing Federal Networks and Critical Infrastructure,” required the importance of the Healthcare, Financial Services, the Secretaries of Commerce and Homeland Security and Energy industries as well as expanding work in to “jointly lead an open and transparent process identity and access management, the Internet of to identify and promote action by appropriate Things, and Internet infrastructure. 98 ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017FOR MORE INFORMATION SEE: Internet. The research focuses on the development of measurement and modeling techniques necessary https://nccoe.nist.gov to understand, predict, and control the behavior of CONTACTS: Internet-scale networked information systems. The ITL staf use these techniques to guide the design, Ms. Donna Dodson Mr. Tim Polk analysis, and standardization of new technologies (301) 975-3669 (301) 975-3348 aimed at improving the robustness of the Internet’s donna.dodson@nist.gov william.polk@nist.gov core infrastructure. Recent eforts have focused on Mr. Tim McBride Ms. KarenWaltermire enhancing the security of several of the foundational (301) 975-0214 (301) 975-0221 routing and communications protocols - the Internet’s timothy.mcbride@nist.gov karen.waltermire@nist.gov Domain Name System (DNS), Border Gateway Protocol (BGP), and Electronic mail (Email) and messaging infrastructures. In addition, the IIP program addresses other systemic vulnerabilities in core Internet technologies such as those that enable INTERNET INFRASTRUCTURE massive scale Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) PROTECTION attacks. The Robust Inter-Domain Routing (RIDR) project aims to remedy serious security and robustness ITL’s Internet Infrastructure Protection (IIP) vulnerabilities in the Internet’s global BGP routing program, led by the Advanced Network Technologies system. In FY 2017, the ITL staf, working with its Division (ANTD), works with industry to develop the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) partners, measurement science and new standards necessary completed the design and standardization of the to ensure the resilience and security of the global BGPsec Protocol Specifcation (RFC8205) and ROUTER SECURITY • - Forged BGP • Route to ' Enterprise A - - . BGPt . ............ ' ' ' ' :., . ' Legitimate . ', I Route to Enterprise A Data Traffic to Enterprise A ---­ HJacked to Attacker 's Network 99 NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017supporting specifcations. BGPsec provides the ability deployment. Figure 37 is a visualization generated by to use digital signatures to prevent both malicious one such monitoring tool that shows the current state and accidental unauthorized routing messages from of Route Origin Authorizations (ROAs) in the global efecting Internet global routing operations. Resource Public Key Infrastructure (RPKI). The RPKI has been designed to provide the trust infrastructure upon which Internet routing security technologies can be based. In FY 2017, as BGPsec and RPKI technology specifcations and implementations matured, ITL shifted its eforts to focus on technology transition and operational issues associated with the new secure routing technologies. The ITL staf and its collaborators published research results on high- speed BGPsec implementations that attempt to In addition to standards development, NIST minimize the operational performance impact of developed and released an open source reference routing security. Figure 38 illustrates a prototype implementation of emerging IETF BGPsec model for investigating and validating the emerging specifcations, on-line test tools to foster their adoption BGP security extensions and supporting protocols. and measurement systems to track their operational Global: 25 Autonomous Systems with the most Prefixes VALID by RPKI   AS Valid D Not-fow1d Invalid OrgName 8551 3,589 BEZEQ--INTERNATIONAL-AS Bezeqint lntE 10620 TernexColo bia S.A., CO 11830 2 267 lnstttuto Costarrioense de Electricidad y T, 7303 1258 255 -l,517 Telecom Argentina S.A., AR 3816 COLOMBIA TELECOMUNICAOIONES S.A. 6147 Telefonica del Peru SAA. , PE 27738 Eouac!ortelecom S.A., EC 31148 FREENET-AS, UA 8866 + BTC-AS BULGARIA, BG 13489 EPMTelooornunicaciones S.A. E.S.P., CO 55430 664 -l,263 STARHUBINTERNET-AS-SNGNBN Startiub 6057 1-==;;;;;;;;~i,';;;~ -----=-=--" Adrninistracion Nacional de Teleoornunica 6830 328 B5i LG'-'UPC formerly known as UPC Broadba 3215 521 282 -851 AS3215, FR 21826 Corporaaion Telernic C.A., VE 28006 CORPORACION NACIONAL DE TELECOMl 9541 CYB ERN ET-AP Cyber Internet Services (F 18101 474 '916 RELIANCE-COMMUNICATIONS-IN' Refia.nCE 50710 EARTHLINK-AS, IQ 9299 I IPG-AS-A P P, pp·ne Long Distance Telep 8048 CANTV Servicios, Venezuela, VE 19429 ETB -Colombia, CO 52228 Cable Tica, CR 47524 TURKSAT-AS, TR 4760 l====="'===============================J HKTIMS-AP PCCW l.Jirnited, HK 0 500 1,000 1,500 2,000 2,500 3,000 3,500 4,000 Prefix Count NIST RPKI Monitor : 201&-05-31 100 Figure 37: Measurement of global networks with most BGP announcements protected by RPKI. ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017Software Suite https://bgpsrx.antd.nist.gov • QuaggaSRx (QSRx) • RPKI-RTR-SVR • RPKI/ BGPsecR outer • RPKI Validation Cache Simulator • BGPSEC-10 (BIO) • SRx Server/ Proxy (SRxSnP) • BGPsecTrafficGene rator • RPKI/ BGPsecValidation Server • SRxCryptoAPI (SCA) • Crypto Module for QSRx& SRxSnP BGPsecT raffic ROA Script RFC8210 10.0.0.0/8 , 10 20 30 65530 RPKI-RTR-SRV add 10.0.0.0/8 16 65530 10.10.0.0/16 30 65530 Cache add 10.10.0.0/16 24 65530 10.20.0.0/16 100 200 65531 Test Harness add 10.20.0.0/16 24 65531 Process BGP Validation Requests Process BGPsec Path Validation Requests Some BGPsec Router RFC 8205 Figure 38: NIST BGPsec prototypes and test tools To further facilitate technology transition, a new NCCoE Secure Inter-Domain Routing (SIDR) project Robust Inter-Domain Routing Project was initiated with industry partners to conduct a https://www.nist.gov/programs-projects/robust-in- proof-of-concept evaluation of the current state of ter-domain-routing secure routing technologies in realistic deployment settings. NCCoE Secure-Inter-Domain Routing Project https://nccoe.nist.gov/projects/building-blocks/se- A second thrust of ITL’s RIDR project is addressing cure-inter-domain-routing the wide-spread problem of BGP “route leaks” – accidental routing policy violations that often result in CONTACTS: large-scale outages in global Internet routing. The ITL Mr. Doug Montgomery Dr. Kotikalapudi Sriram staf have lead the development of IETF specifcations (301) 975-3630 (301) 975-3973 that defne the problem space (see RFC 7809, Problem dougm@nist.gov ksriram@nist.gov Defnition and Classifcation of BGP Route Leaks) and the corresponding proposed mitigation techniques. FOR MORE INFORMATION: NIST RPKI monitor https://rpki-monitor.antd.nist.gov/ 101 NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017ADVANCED SECURITY TESTING acceptance, and adoption of security automation solutions to address current and future security AND MEASUREMENTS challenges, creating opportunities for innovation. Security Automation and Continuous Specifcation, Standards, and Monitoring Guidance Development IT organizations operate a diverse set of To support the overarching security automation computing assets that access, route, store, and vision, it is necessary to have specifcations that process information that is critical to the operations of describe the required interactions between systems, businesses and the missions of government agencies. standards that document international consensus These IT environments are under constant threat of approaches, and guidance for product developers and attack and are frequently undergoing change, with implementers. Through close work with partners in new and updated software being deployed along government, industry, and academia, CSD continues with updated confgurations. The wide variety of to facilitate the defnition and development of security computing products, the dynamic nature of software, automation approaches that enable organizations to the speed of confguration change, and the diversity understand and manage IT security risks. of threats require organizations to maintain situational During FY 2017, CSD has continued to build on awareness over their IT assets and to utilize this previous security automation work, as follows: information to make informed risk-based decisions. • Identifed and addressed gaps in the current Security automation utilizes standardized data specifcations; formats and transport protocols to enable data to be exchanged between business, operational, and • Evolved existing approaches to achieve security systems that support security processes by: greater scalability and impact; • Identifying IT assets, including hardware, • Participated in working groups in standards software, and data; development organizations to promote international consensus around standardized • Providing awareness over the operational approaches; state of computing devices; • Provided additional guidance on architectural, • Enabling security reference data to be design, and analysis concerns; and collected from internal and external sources; and • Developed and maintained tools and reference implementations. • Supporting analysis processes that measure the efectiveness of security controls and CSD is currently working with its partners in various provide visibility into security risks, enabling standards-development organizations, including risk-based decision making. ISO, IETF, the Organization for the Advancement of Structured Information Standards (OASIS), the Commercial solutions built using security Forum of Incident Response and Security Teams automation specifcations enable the collection and (FIRST), and the Trusted Computing Group (TCG), to harmonization of vast amounts of operational and further mature and broaden the adoption of security security data into coherent, comparable information automation specifcations, reference data, and streams to achieve situational awareness that allows techniques. This area of work is focused on evolving the timely and active management of diverse IT security automation specifcations to integrate with systems. Through the creation of reference data existing transport protocols to provide for the secure, and guidance and the international recognition of interoperable exchange of security automation data. fexible, open standards, the NIST security automation Additional work is focused on evolving security 102 program works to improve the interoperability, broad ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017metrics and providing consensus guidance on security security software products communicate information automation approaches. Through the defnition about software faws, security confgurations, and and adoption of security automation standards other aspects of the device state. SCAP enables and guidelines, IT vendors will be able to provide security automation content, also known as “SCAP standardized security solutions to their customers. content,” to be expressed using standardized These solutions support continuous monitoring and formats, identifers, and scoring models. This content automated, dynamic network defense capabilities, can be used by any tool that is conformant to the based on the analysis of data from operational and specifcations to collect and evaluate the state of security data sources and the collective action of software installed on a device. security components. Additionally, CSD is working with the vulnerability community to enable the automated analysis of metrics such as the Common Vulnerability Scoring System (CVSS), establishing a baseline of the minimum information needed to properly inform the vulnerability management process, and facilitating the sharing of vulnerability information across language barriers. To assist in this work, a public draft of NISTIR 8138, Vulnerability Description Ontology (VDO): A Framework for Characterizing Vulnerabilities, was created to foster a conversation and collect feedback on the best mechanisms to improve the degree of automation within vulnerability management processes. CSD is planning to develop this document iteratively by releasing additional drafts in FY 2018 to Credit: Shutterstock/Den Rise ensure participation from as many stakeholders in the vulnerability community as possible. SCAP has been widely adopted by major software and hardware manufacturers and has Security automation standardization work has become a signifcant component of information been focused in three areas: the evolution and security management and governance programs. international adoption of the Security Content SCAP-enabled tools are currently being used by the Automation Protocol (SCAP), the development of U.S. Government, critical infrastructure companies, software asset management standards to support academia, and other businesses, both domestically operational and cybersecurity use cases, and the and internationally. Currently, CSD is leveraging development of security automation consensus SCAP in multiple areas, both to support its own standards. The following sections detail this work. mission and to enable other agencies and private- sector entities to meet their goals. For CSD, SCAP is Security Content Automation a critical component of the SCAP Validation Program, the National Vulnerability Database (NVD), and the Protocol (SCAP) National Checklist Program (NCP). SCAP is a multipurpose protocol that provides In September 2012, CSD published SP 800-126 an automated means to collect and assess the state Revision 2, The Technical Specifcation for the Security of devices. SCAP supports automated vulnerability Content Automation Protocol (SCAP): SCAP Version checking, verifying the installation of patches, 1.2. That document describes the 11 component checking security confguration settings, verifying specifcations composing SCAP. See Table 3 for details. technical-control compliance, measuring security, and examining systems for indicators of a compromise. Since the release of SCAP 1.2, CSD has worked 103 SCAP uses the Extensible Markup Language (XML) to to improve guidance for using SCAP specifcations. standardize the format and nomenclature by which In FY 2015, CSD released draft NISTIR 8058, Security NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017Content Automation Protocol (SCAP) Version 1.2 Scoring System (CVSS) v3, which was Content Style Guide: Best Practices for Creating released in June 2015; and Maintaining SCAP 1.2 Content, which provides • Removal of support for CVSSv2; and guidance for SCAP 1.2 content creators to ensure that stylistic variations in SCAP 1.2 content are addressed • Deprecation of support for older specifcation in a way that improves the accuracy and consistency revisions and SCAP 1.0. of results, avoids performance problems, reduces user efort, lowers content maintenance burdens, and CSD is currently working to publish the fnal enables content reuse. To achieve this, NISTIR 8058 versions of the publications described above in documents best practices for content creation and early FY 2018. CSD has published a beta release of encourages their use by SCAP content authors and an updated version of SCAPVal, the SCAP content maintainers. Feedback on this document is welcomed validation tool. A fnal version of this tool will be and will help CSD to work toward producing a fnal provided after the SP 800-126 documents have been version of this NISTIR 8058. fnalized. CSD is also working to update the SCAP Validation Program to support SCAP 1.3, with an update to NISTIR 5711 to be posted in early FY 2018. More information on SCAP 1.3 can be found at: https:// csrc.nist.gov/Projects/Security-Content-Automation- Protocol/SCAP-Releases/SCAP-1-3. CSD is also starting to plan an SCAP 2.0 release (SCAP v2). This release will further defne the interfaces and use of transport protocols for SCAP tools to provide component-level interoperability between products supporting various SCAP functions. By providing more interoperability, SCAP v2 will provide the basic software and confguration posture information needed to make and automate management decisions for networked devices as Credit: Shutterstock/Titima Ongkantong part of the license, vulnerability and confguration CSD is actively working on an SCAP 1.3 revision. In management practices, supporting improved July 2016, CSD posted drafts for public comment of networked device hygiene. Furthermore, the posture SP 800-126 Revision 3 and SP 800-126A. SP 800-126 information provided by SCAP v2 products will provide Revision 3, is The Technical Specifcation for the Security much of the context needed to prevent, detect, and Content Automation Protocol (SCAP): SCAP Version respond to network attacks. This additional context 1.3. SP 800-126A is SCAP 1.3 Component Specifcation will enable SCAP v2 information to be applied for Version Updates: An Annex to NIST Special Publication application whitelisting, the detection of anomalous 800-126 Revision 3. These publications collectively behavior, the gathering and use of indicators, the document the draft requirements for SCAP 1.3. SP use of machine-readable threat information, and for 800-126A is a new publication that allows SCAP 1.3 to orchestrating courses of action. CSD is preparing a take advantage of selected minor version updates of draft whitepaper for release in early FY 2018 that will SCAP component specifcations, as well as designated outline an approach, a development plan identifying Open Vulnerability and Assessment Language (OVAL) the new and revised specifcations that will be platform schema revisions. The SCAP 1.3 revision needed, and a transition plan for moving from SCAP includes the following changes: 1.x to SCAP 2.0. A discussion draft of the SCAP 2.0 specifcation addressing software asset management • Adoption of the Open Vulnerability and and vulnerability management use cases will also Assessment Language (OVAL) 5.11.1, which be published in FY 2018 as a way to start a broader was released in April 2015; conversation with the SCAP community about where 104 to focus next on the development of SCAP 2.0. • Adoption of the Common Vulnerability ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017TABLE 3: SCAP 1.2 SPECIFICATIONS SPECIFICATIONS DESCRIPTION Languages Extensible Confguration Checklist Description Used for authoring security checklists/benchmarks Format (XCCDF) 1.2 and for reporting the results of evaluating them Used for representing system-confguration Open Vulnerability and Assessment Language information, assessing machine state, and reporting (OVAL) 5.11.2 assessment results Used for representing checks that collect information Open Checklist Interactive Language (OCIL) 2.0 from people or from existing data stores populated by other data collection methods Reporting Formats Used to express information about assets and to Asset Reporting Format (ARF) 1.1 defne the relationships between assets and reports Used to uniquely identify assets based on known Asset Identifcation 1.1 identifers and other asset information Identifcation Schemes A nomenclature and dictionary of hardware, Common Platform Enumeration (CPE) 2.3 operating systems, and applications; a method to identify the applicability to platforms A structured metadata format for describing a Software Identifcation (SWID) Tags 2015 released software product A nomenclature and dictionary of software-security Common Confguration Enumeration (CCE) 5 confgurations A nomenclature and dictionary of security-related Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE) software faws Measurement and Scoring Systems Used for measuring the relative severity of software Common Vulnerability Scoring System (CVSS) faws Used for measuring the relative severity of device Common Confguration Scoring System (CCSS) security (mis-)confguration issues Content and Result Integrity Guidance for using digital signatures in a common Trust Model for Security Automation Data (TMSAD) trust model applied to security automation 105 specifcations NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017Software Asset Management and related software patches, and assessing secure software confgurations. Standards To supplement the requirements in ISO/IEC CSD has been collaborating with industry 19770-2:2015, CSD collaborated with DHS, NSA, partners to promote the adoption of ISO/IEC and MITRE on the development of NISTIR 8060, 19770-2:2015, Information technology—Software Guidelines for the Creation of Interoperable Software asset management—Part 2: Software identifcation Identifcation (SWID) Tags. NISTIR 8060, published in tag, which establishes a specifcation for tagging April 2016, provides an overview of the capabilities software to support identifcation and management. and usage of SWID tags as part of a comprehensive The software identifcation (SWID) data model software lifecycle. This report introduces SWID defned by this standard describes an XML format tags in an operational context, provides guidelines for software publishers to provide authoritative for the creation of interoperable SWID tags, and identifcation, categorization, software relationships highlights key usage scenarios for which SWID tags (e.g., dependency, bundling, and patching), are applicable. Figure 39 illustrates several types of executable and library footprint details, and other SWID tags (as indicated in the legend) and how these metadata for software. This information can be used support multiple elements of the software product to support operational and cybersecurity use cases life cycle, including deployment, installation, patching, around managing software deployments, managing upgrading and removal. software licenses, managing software vulnerabilities LEGEND ~ CORPUS ~ PRIMARY ~ SUPPLEMENTAL ~ PATCH Figure 39: SWID Tags Support the Software Product Lifecycle Additionally, in FY 2017, NIST has worked with based collection of software inventory information the IETF to integrate SWID tags into the Network using SWID tag information. Endpoint Assessment (NEA) protocol, through the The information provided within SWID tags Software Inventory Message and Attributes (SWIMA) enhances the SCAP use cases by providing for PA-TNC specifcation (see https://datatracker.ietf. authoritative information that can be used to create org/doc/draft-ietf-sacm-nea-swima-patnc/). This Common Platform Enumeration (CPE) names, to draft Request for Comments (RFC) will be published support the targeting of checklists, and to associate 106 soon, describing a method for the automated, event- software faws to products, based on a defect in ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017a software library or executable. In FY 2017, CSD automation-relevant information types. The ROLIE published a SWID tag validation tool (see https:// draft has undergone two major revisions, with the scap.nist.gov/specifcations/swid/), called SWIDVal, fnal draft nearing completion. In addition, CSD has that can validate a SWID tag document against the begun the process of collaborating with MILE and ISO/IEC 19770-2:2015 and NISTIR 8060 requirements. other stakeholders to create extension drafts for ROLIE that address a number of information types, including vulnerability, confguration checklist, and Development of Security Automation software metadata information types. Consensus Standards The main ROLIE draft can be found at https:// CSD has been promoting the broad international datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-mile-rolie/. adoption of SCAP by encouraging the integration of Additional information on ROLIE and on the extension SCAP into other standards, and by adapting SCAP drafts can be found in the working repository on to address specifc gaps and challenges. CSD has GitHub: https://github.com/CISecurity/ROLIE/. continued its collaboration with its industry partners CSD also worked with its government and in the IETF Security Automation and Continuous industry partners in the TCG to defne a number Monitoring (SACM) working group. This working of specifcations related to the Trusted Network group provides a venue for advancing appropriate Connect (TNC) protocol. The frst such publication SCAP specifcations into international standards and is the TNC SCAP Messages for IF-M specifcation addressing identifed gap areas. The current scope of that supports carrying the SCAP content and results work for SACM includes identifying and/or defning over the TNC protocols. IF-M is a messaging protocol the transport protocols and data formats needed that helps communicate measurement information to support the collection and evaluation of details about endpoints for evaluation against security regarding a device’s state against the expected policy. The second is the TNC Endpoint Compliance values. The SACM working group has been working on Profle (ECP) and related specifcations that support identifying use cases, requirements, and architectural the exchange of SWID data over the TNC protocols. models to provide information to facilitate decisions The ECP enables the collection of SWID data from a about existing specifcations and standards that can device for use by external tools to provide software be referenced, required modifcations or extensions inventory information. SCAP and SWID data collected to existing specifcations and standards, and any gaps using these mechanisms may be optionally used for that need to be addressed. CSD is working with DHS, network access control decision making, allowing the the Center for Internet Security (CIS), and the TCG device state to be evaluated when devices connect to bring existing work into the IETF SACM working and on an ongoing basis thereafter. group, including OVAL and specifcations related to the Trusted Network Connect (TNC) protocol. For more information on this specifcation, please visit: http://www.trustedcomputinggroup. For more information, please refer to: http:// org/resources/tnc_endpoint_compliance_profle_ datatracker.ietf.org/wg/sacm/charter/. specifcation. Also, within the IETF, CSD has been collaborating Updated versions of the ECP and SWID-related with the Managed Incident Lightweight Exchange specifcations, along with a usage scenario around (MILE) working group in order to develop the vulnerability assessment, are currently being worked Resource-Oriented Lightweight Information Exchange on in the SACM and MILE working groups, which are (ROLIE) specifcation. This specifcation seeks available through the locations indicated in Table 4. to address the security automation information discovery and dissemination use cases by defning The SACM and MILE working groups have been how tools are expected to communicate with security developing the following related Internet Drafts: automation information repositories. ROLIE allows for the transport, retrieval, and storage of any security 107 NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017INTERNET DRAFT PURPOSE A Concise Binary Object Representation (CBOR) https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-sacm- [RFC7049] based specifcation for representing coswid/ SWID tag for use with constrained IoT devices. Specifes the Endpoint Compliance Profle (ECP), that describes the use of IETF and TNC protocols and interfaces to support the ongoing assessment https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-sacm-ecp/ of endpoint posture and the controlled exposure of collected posture information to authorized security applications. Extends the PA-TNC specifcation [RFC5792] to https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-sacm-nea- provide specifc attributes and message exchanges swima-patnc/ allowing endpoints to report their installed software inventory information to a NEA server. The ROLIE protocol supporting a resource-oriented https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-mile-rolie/ approach for security automation information publication, discovery, and sharing. https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-sacm-rolie- An extension to ROLIE to support the exchange of softwaredescriptor/ SWID-based software information. https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-sacm- Defnition of the common terminology used within terminology/ several working-group documents. Additionally, CSD has several members who are For more information, please visit: http://www. actively engaged on the CVE Board, which is working frst.org/global/sigs. to improve the assignment of CVE identifers for Through work with international standards- vulnerabilities, with the overall goal of improving developing organizations (SDOs), SCAP and its the automated processing of vulnerabilities and the related security automation capabilities are expected timeliness of CVE identifer issuance. to evolve and expand in support of the growing need Finally, CSD has worked with FIRST by to defne and measure efective security controls, participating in two Special Interest Groups (SIGs). assess and monitor ongoing aspects of information The CVSS SIG (CVSS-SIG) is focused on maintaining security, remediate noncompliance, and successfully and improving the CVSS scoring model, based on manage systems in accordance with the Risk community feedback. The CVSS-SIG published CVSS Management Framework described in SP 800-37 Revision 3 (CVSS v3) in June 2015. The second SIG, Revision 1, Guide for Applying the Risk Management the Vulnerability Reporting and Data eXchange SIG Framework to Federal Information Systems: A Security (VRDX-SIG), researches and recommends methods for Life Cycle Approach. Standards that are developed identifying and exchanging vulnerability information and published by these SDOs will be considered for across disparate vulnerability databases. inclusion in future revisions of SCAP. 108 ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017FOR MORE INFORMATION, SEE: • Over 96,000 vulnerability advisories, with an average of 62 new vulnerabilities added daily; https://scap.nist.gov/ • 183 SCAP-expressed checklists across 123 CONTACT: platforms containing thousands of low-level Mr. David Waltermire security confguration checks that can be (301) 975-3390 used by SCAP-validated security products to david.waltermire@nist.gov perform automated evaluations of the system state; Security Automation Reference Data • 293 non-SCAP security checklists (e.g., English prose guidance and confguration scripts); Through the National Vulnerability Database and the National Checklist Program (see below), NIST is • 249 U.S. Computer Emergency Readiness providing relevant and important reference data in the Team (US-CERT) alerts; 4,467 US-CERT areas of vulnerability and confguration management. vulnerability summaries; and 10,286 SCAP SCAP and the programs that leverage it are moving machine-readable software faw checks; and the information assurance industry toward being able to standardize communications and toward the • A product dictionary with over 124,000 collection and storage of relevant data in standardized operating system, application, and hardware formats, as well as providing an automated means for name entries; and over 75,000 vulnerability the assessment and remediation of systems for both advisories translated into Spanish. vulnerabilities and confguration compliance. NVD is hosted and maintained by NIST and is sponsored by the Department of Homeland Security’s National Vulnerability Database US-CERT. (NVD) The use of SCAP data by commercial security products, deployed in thousands of organizations Security automation reference data is currently worldwide, has extended NVD’s efective reach. housed within the NVD. The NVD is a comprehensive Increasing demand for NVD XML data feeds (i.e., cybersecurity vulnerability database that allows mechanisms that provide updated data from data the tracking of vulnerability trends over time. This sources) and SCAP-expressed content from the NVD trending service allows users to assess changes in website demonstrates an increased adoption of SCAP. vulnerability discovery rates within specifc products or within specifc types of vulnerabilities. NVD data In the past year, the NVD began providing CVSS is represented using the SCAP specifcations. The base scores following the CVSS v3 specifcation within NVD includes databases of security confguration the data feeds and completed a major enhancement checklists for the NCP, listings of publicly known to the overall user interface. The NVD has also seen a software faws, product names, and impact metrics. A signifcant increase (almost three fold) in vulnerabilities formal validation program tests the ability of vendor received and analyzed over the previous year. Overall, products to use some forms of security automation the NVD has experienced an average download data, based on a product’s conformance in support of growth rate of over 10 % per month. specifc enterprise capabilities. FOR MORE INFORMATION, SEE: SCAP defnes the structure of standardized https://nvd.nist.gov software faws and security confguration reference data, also known as SCAP content. This reference data CONTACT: is provided by the NVD. Mr. Robert Byers As of the end of September 2017, the NVD (301) 975-3279 contained the following resources: robert.byers@nist.gov 109 NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017National Checklist Program (NCP) (FAR) was published. Paragraph (d) of section 39.101 states, “In acquiring information technology, agencies There are many threats to IT, ranging from shall include the appropriate IT security policies and remotely launched network service exploits to requirements, including the use of common security malicious code spread through infected emails, confgurations available from the NIST website at websites, and downloaded fles. Vulnerabilities in IT https://checklists.nist.gov. Agency contracting ofcers products are discovered daily, and many ready-to- should consult with the requiring ofcial to ensure use exploitation techniques are widely available on that the appropriate standards are incorporated.” the Internet. Because IT products are often intended In Memorandum M-08-22, OMB mandated the for a wide variety of audiences, restrictive security use of SCAP-validated products for the continuous confguration controls are usually not enabled by monitoring of Federal Desktop Core Confguration default. As a result, many out-of-the box IT products (FDCC) compliance. The NCP strives to encourage are immediately vulnerable. In addition, identifying and assist federal agencies with these mandates. a reasonable set of security settings that achieve balanced risk management is a complicated, arduous, The goals of the NCP are to: and time-consuming task, even for experienced system administrators. • Facilitate the development and sharing of checklists by providing a formal framework for checklist developers to submit checklists to NIST; • Provide guidance to developers to help them create standardized, high quality checklists that conform to common operation environments; • Help developers and users by providing guidelines for making checklists better documented and more usable; • Encourage software vendors and other parties to develop checklists; • Provide a managed process for the review, Credit: Shutterstock/Natali_ Mis update, and maintenance of checklists; • Provide an easy-to-use repository of To facilitate the development of security checklists; and confguration checklists for IT products and to make checklists more organized and usable, CSD • Encourage the use of automation technologies established the National Checklist Program (NCP) (e.g., SCAP) for checklist application. in furtherance of its statutory responsibilities under the Federal Information Security Management Act At the end of FY 2017, there are a total of 476 (FISMA) of 2002, Public Law 107-347, and also under checklists posted on the NCP website (see https:// the Cybersecurity Research and Development Act, checklists.nist.gov/). Of that total, 183 of the checklists, which mandates that NIST “develop, and revise as addressing 123 platforms, are SCAP-expressed and necessary, a checklist setting forth settings and option can be used with SCAP-validated products. selections that minimize the security risks associated Organizations can use the checklists obtained with each computer hardware or software system from the NCP website for automated security that is, or is likely to become, widely used within the confguration patch assessment. The NCP currently Federal Government.” In February 2008, a revision provides metadata and links to the latest operating 110 of Part 39 of the Federal Acquisition Regulation ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017systems and applications checklists, including MacOS In 2017, NIST released a draft version of SP 800- 10.10, Windows 10, Internet Explorer 11.0, Internet 70 Revision 4, which can be viewed at https://csrc. Explorer 10.0, Ofce 2016, Red Hat Enterprise Linux, nist.gov/CSRC/media/Publications/sp/800-70/rev-4/ and other products. draft/documents/sp800-70r4-draft.pdf. SP 800-70 Revision 4 will be published as fnal in FY 2018, and To assist users in identifying automated checklist the checklists.nist.gov website will be modifed to content, NCP groups these checklists into tiers, from refect the updated document. Tier I to Tier IV. The NCP uses the tiers to rank checklists according to their automation capability. Tier III and FOR MORE INFORMATION, SEE: IV checklists include fully vetted SCAP content that https://checklists.nist.gov has successfully demonstrated conformance to the requirements outlined in SP 800-126. Tier III & IV CONTACT: checklists are considered production-ready and are Mr. Stephen Quinn intended for use with SCAP-validated products. Tier (301) 975-6967 II checklists document the recommended security stephen.quinn@nist.gov settings in a machine-readable format such as the XCCDF-only (i.e., no OVAL content), proprietary Apple macOS Security Confguration format, or product-specifc confguration script. Tier I checklists are prose-based and contain no machine- CSD’s macOS security confguration team readable content. is working to develop secure system confguration baselines supporting diferent operational Users can browse the checklists, based on the environments for Apple macOS version 10.12, checklist tier, IT product, IT product category, or “Sierra.” These confguration guidelines will assist authority, and through a keyword search that searches organizations with hardening macOS technologies the checklist name and summary for user-specifed and provide a basis for unifed controls and settings terms. The search results show the detailed checklist for federal macOS workstation and mobile system metadata and a link to any SCAP content for the security confgurations. The confgurations are based checklist, as well as links to any supporting resources on a collection of resources, including the existing associated with the checklist. NIST macOS confguration guidance, the Defense To assist checklist developers, the NCP provides Information Systems Agency (DISA) macOS Security both manual and automated interfaces to facilitate the Technical Implementation Guide (STIG), and the submission and maintenance processes. The manual Center for Internet Security (CIS) macOS Security interface consists of a web application that guides the Benchmark. submitter through the data entry process to ensure that all the required information is submitted. The The project team researched and tested submission is validated upon review, and a report is approximately 270 settings for macOS 10.12. The returned to the submitting organization, verifying confguration set has been signifcantly reduced due either acceptance or rejection, based on the criteria to changes in the operating system’s features and requirements. For instance, Tier III and Tier IV default setting values. Among other collected data, checklists require validation using the SCAP Content each setting has a designated Common Confguration Validation Tool (this tool is available for download via Enumeration (CCE) number, which aids in its long- https://scap.nist.gov/). term tracking. Figure 40 illustrates the various categories that comprise the baselines. Note that The NCP is defned in SP 800-70 Revision a higher quantity of settings in a category does not 3, National Checklist Program for IT Products— imply greater importance over other categories. Guidelines for Checklist Users and Developers, which can be found at https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/ PubsSPs.html. 111 NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017Updates, 5 Built-in A!pplications, 6 Access Control, 5 Integrity, 5 Authent ication, 22 Loca I Services, 6 Speech,4 Finder, 3 Screen Saver, 6 Firewall, 29 Network Services, 21 I SSH,15 Total: 145 Power Management, 4 Figure 40: Confguration Categories The shell scripts that apply the settings to a macOS was published. This document explains the settings, 10.12 system are organized into three key baselines, their security signifcance, and how to confgure them which are appropriate for diferent environments: for the three baselines described above. The project team then focused on updating the guide, script • The Standalone baseline describes small, and spreadsheet of settings for Apple macOS 10.12 informal computer installations that are used systems. for home or business purposes; In FY 2018, the team plans to: • The Managed baseline is appropriate for centrally managed, networked systems; and • Produce an updated guide for macOS 10.12; • The Specialized Security-Limited Functionality • Continue to refne the script and add more (SSLF) baseline is appropriate for systems settings to the confguration; and where security requirements are more • Investigate macOS 10.13, “High Sierra.” stringent and where the implementation of security safeguards is likely to reduce FOR MORE INFORMATION, SEE: functionality. https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/apple-os-x-security- confguration In FY 2017, the fnal version of SP 800-179, Guide to https://github.com/usnistgov/applesec Securing Apple OS X 10.10 Systems for IT Professionals 112 ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017CONTACTS: ofer virtual servers that can be rented on demand by users. This paradigm enables cloud customers to Mr. Mark Trapnell Mr. Lee Badger acquire computing resources with high efciency, low (301) 975-4091 (301) 975-3176 cost and great fexibility. However, it also introduces mark.trapnell@nist.gov lee.badger@nist.gov many security problems that need to be solved. Considered as an emerging branch of forensics Mr. Murugiah Souppaya (301) 975-8443 that combine network and systems forensics, cloud murugiah.souppaya@nist.gov forensics addresses post-incident analysis of systems with the complexities of distributed processing, multi-tenancy and virtualization. CSD has developed a framework that shows what evidence can be used to reconstruct corresponding attack scenarios in TECHNICAL SECURITY METRICS the cloud, and discusses how this framework can be applied to automate the forensics analysis in the cloud with the objective of saving a forensics investigator’s Security Risk Analysis of Enterprise time. Networks Using Attack Graphs CSD has also developed a layered graphical model The protection of computer networks from to analyze the impact of cyber attacks on business malicious intrusions is critical to the economy and processes and services. The model has three layers: security of the nation. Vulnerabilities are regularly the upper layer models that the business processes discovered in software applications that are exploited and their dependencies, the middle layer constructs to stage cyber attacks. System administrators need attack scenarios using evidences in log fles, and the objective metrics to guide and justify decision lowest layer reconstructs the missing attack steps making as they manage the security risk of enterprise using system calls. Based on the graph produced from networks. The objective of this research is to develop the three layers, the model computes a quantitative a standard model for the security risk analysis of impact on the business processes. CSD has developed computer networks. A standard model will enable a case study that shows the usability of this model an organization to answer questions such as “Are and how it can be applied for both forensics analysis we more secure now than yesterday?” or “How does and for mitigating the impact of cyber attacks on the the security of one network confguration compare enterprise infrastructure. CSD published two papers with another one?” Also, having a standard model to in this area: measure network security will allow users, vendors, 1. Identifying Evidence for Cloud Forensics and researchers to evaluate methodologies and Analysis, International Federation for products for network security in a coherent and Information Processing (IFIP) International consistent manner. Conference on Digital Forensics, Orlando, FL, January 29 - February 1, 2017. CSD has approached the challenge of network security analysis by capturing vulnerability 2. Towards Actionable Mission Impact interdependencies and measuring security, based on Assessment in the Context of Cloud how real attackers have penetrated networks. The Computing, 31st IFIP WG 11.3 Conference on methodology used for security risk analysis is based Data and Application Security and Privacy, on attack graphs. CSD analyzes attack paths through a Philadelphia, July 19-21, 2017. network, providing a probabilistic metric of the overall system risk. Through this metric, trade-ofs between In FY 2018, CSD plans to develop new techniques security costs and security benefts are analyzed. and metrics for Cloud Computing forensics analysis Computer systems are vulnerable to both known and mission impact analysis. CSD also plans to publish and zero-day attacks. Enterprises have begun to move the results as a NIST report and as white papers in 113 parts of their networks from a traditional infrastructure conferences and journals. into cloud computing environments. Cloud providers NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017FOR MORE INFORMATION, SEE: Proceedings of the 2nd Annual Industrial Control System Security Workshop). https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/measuring-security- risk-in-enterprise-networks/ • The team discovered that n-gram anomaly detection (the most successful anomaly CONTACT: detection method to date) can act primarily Dr. Anoop Singhal as a signature system. This happens, in a form (301) 975-4432 we call micro-signatures, when removing anoop.singhal@nist.gov attacks from within test data in order to train on a clean set of data. This result reveals Algorithms for Intrusion a new methodology for hybrid anomaly/ signature detection systems while also calling Measurement into question many past anomaly detection results (this research was published in the The Algorithms for Intrusion Measurement (AIM) proceedings of the International Symposium project furthers measurement science in designing on Foundations and Practice of Security). and implementing algorithms to both detect attackers and limit their ability to intrude into a system. Most In FY 2018, the AIM project will work on evaluating of the work leverages graph theory (the math of dots the privacy of global Internet trafc, architectures for and lines) and algorithmic complexity analysis (the cryptocurrencies to limit criminal behavior, secure math around fast computation). In performing this methods for transactions involving digital goods, and work, the AIM project seeks to enhance the nation’s how to publish trustworthy random numbers using ability to defend itself from network-borne attacks. blockchains and smart contracts. In FY 2017, the AIM project completed research in FOR MORE INFORMATION, SEE: several areas: it proved that an important access control https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/aim system is scalable, created novel metrics for defense- in-depth measurement, and identifed an important CONTACT: intrusion detection approach. More specifcally, the Mr. Peter Mell project team accomplished the following: (301) 975-5572 • The team proved that the NGAC model is peter.mell@nist.gov scalable by providing a fast-linear time, decision algorithm when existing reference Automated Combinatorial Testing implementations used slow cubic algorithms. This enables enterprises to reduce insider Software engineers often encounter failures threats by tightly controlling data access that result from an unexpected interaction between through simultaneous instantiation of multiple components. A NIST investigation of actual failures access control policies (the research was has shown that most failures are triggered by one published in the Journal of Wireless Mobile or two parameters, and progressively fewer by Networks, Ubiquitous Computing, and three, four, or more parameters (see Figure 41); this Dependable Applications and the Proceedings relationship is called the Interaction Rule. These results of the 2016 International Workshop on have important implications for testing software and Managing Insider Security Threats). systems. If all faults in a system can be triggered by a combination of n or fewer parameters, then testing • The team created novel metrics to measure all n-way combinations of parameters with a practical the defense-in-depth posture of network number of tests can provide strong fault detection systems. They proved that the metrics are efciency. These methods are being applied to extremely difcult to calculate (NP-Hard), software and hardware testing for reliability, safety, and thus provided efcient and accurate and security. CSD’s focus is on empirical results and approximation algorithms (this research 114 the impact on real-world problems. was published in the proceedings of the ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017Project highlights for FY 2017 include the software distributions; input to DoD recommendations development of a mathematical model that closely on software test and verifcation; the release of replicates the evolution and distribution of t-way enhanced combinatorial measurement tools; input failures found in empirical studies; invited lectures modeling and fault location tools; the development of at conferences and universities; leading the Sixth new test methods and tools specifc to cryptography; International Workshop on Combinatorial Testing, the development of new test methods and tools held in conjunction with the Ninth IEEE International specifc to full-text search; and seminars at Conference on Software Testing; the development of conferences, universities, and federal agencies. combinatorial test methods specifc to text search, with Plans for FY 2018 include the development of a demonstration of their practical application; and the methods and tools for testing cyber-physical systems development of combinatorial test methods specifc and IoT systems; a potential application to place to cryptographic software that discovered previously smart contract functions on a blockchain; methods unknown faults in AES algorithm implementations. for reducing the generation cost of high-assurance Collaborators include researchers from the University and life-critical software requirements; a trial use of of Texas at Arlington, the University of Texas at prototype methods and tools for oracle-free testing Dallas, Loyola University of Maryland, East Carolina methods; the analysis of empirical data on failures; University, Duke University, Texas A&M, and the Air further development of methods and tools for fault Force Institute of Technology. localization; and seminars, workshops, and tutorials at Technology transfer activities included the professional meetings and research labs. publication of a number of technical papers and Cumulative proportion of faults fort= 1 .. 6 100 90 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0 1 -- FDA 2 -- Browser 3 -- Server 4 ----· DBMS 5 -- NWSec- 6 -- MySQL ----- MySQL2 - · - Apache2 -- oscs -- NeoKylin 115 Figure 41: Distribution of failures at t = 1..6 NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017FOR MORE INFORMATION, SEE: Roots of trust are highly reliable and secure hardware, frmware, and software components that https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/automated- perform specifc, critical security functions. Because combinatorial-testing-for-software roots of trust are inherently trusted, they must be CONTACTS: secure by their design. As such, many roots of trust are implemented in hardware or protected frmware Dr. Rick Kuhn Dr. Raghu Kacker so that malware cannot tamper with the functions (301) 975-3337 (301) 975-2109 kuhn@nist.gov raghu.kacker@nist.gov they provide. Roots of trust provide a frm foundation from which to build security and trust. Roots of Trust This project aims to encourage the use of roots of trust in computers to provide stronger security Modern computing devices consist of various assurances. A focus area for this work has been hardware, frmware, and software components at securing frmware. Previous work in this project multiple layers of abstraction (see Figure 42). Many described methods to protect boot frmware as part security and protection mechanisms are currently of the SP 800-147 series, now standardized by ISO/ rooted in software that, along with all underlying IEC JTC 1/SC 27, IT Security Techniques, as ISO/IEC components, must be trusted and not tampered 19678:2015, Information Technology – BIOS Protection with. A vulnerability in any of those components Guidelines. could compromise the trustworthiness of the security mechanisms that rely upon those components. A new efort in FY 2017 built upon that earlier work Stronger security assurances may be possible by focused on boot frmware to research and develop grounding security mechanisms in roots of trust. techniques and guidelines for securing frmware throughout the platform. Released for public comment in May 2017, SP 800-193, Platform Resiliency Guidelines, provides technical guidelines and recommendations supporting the resiliency of platform frmware and data against potentially destructive attacks. These draft guidelines promote resiliency in the platform by describing security mechanisms for protecting the platform against unauthorized changes, detecting unauthorized changes that occur, and secure recovery from attacks. These new draft guidelines have been the basis for discussions with industry, standards organizations, and consortiums over technologies, standards, and specifcations that can improve the resiliency of computer platforms using roots of trust. Based on these discussions, NIST expects to fnalize SP 800-193 in FY 2018 and continue outreach to stakeholders in government, industry, and academia to encourage the development of more secure and reliable systems. FOR MORE INFORMATION, SEE: https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/hardware-roots-of-trust CONTACT: Mr. Andrew Regenscheid Figure 42: Layers of Abstraction within a Mobile (301) 975-5155 116 Computing Device andrew.regenscheid@nist.gov ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017USABILITY AND SECURITY With the data developed, usability researchers have successfully answered both an operational assessment question, Why are users clicking or not clicking on phishing links and attachments?, as well The goal of the Usable Security and Privacy team, as the larger institution’s trial deployment question, part of ITL’s Information Access Division (IAD), is to Why are click rates so variable? In contrast to previous provide guidance for policymakers, system engineers research that was primarily performed in laboratory and security professionals so that they can make better settings, the present work examines 4.5 years of in decisions that enhance the usability of cybersecurity situ embedded simulated phishing emails. The results in their organizations. have provided additional insights into the rationale that leads some users to become victims of phishing During FY 2017, the team contributed usability attacks and malicious software. Given the variety of chapters to SP 800-63, Digital Identity Guidelines, phishing premises and user contexts, no amount of marking the frst time that there were dedicated training will consistently reduce click rates to zero, usability chapters in this publication. but the fndings helped better understand the user’s role in early detection, combined with technological Phishing Awareness Training and solutions, and determined that awareness training Evaluation and reporting should be fully supported and even incentivized in the workforce. During FY 2017, the usability team completed FOR MORE INFORMATION, SEE: a long-term operational phishing evaluation, demonstrating the importance of individual user https://www.nist.gov/itl context in explaining phishing email click decisions; CONTACTS: this collaboration provided the supporting data necessary to interpret the previously puzzling Mrs. Mary Theofanos Ms. Kristen Greene variability in click rates observed across prior years of (301) 975-5889 (301) 975-8119 operational phishing awareness training exercises. mary.theofanos@nist.gov kristen.greene@nist.gov The team performed research regarding attacks Ms. Michelle Steves known as phishing, where a sender initiates an email (301) 975-3537 containing fraudulent information with the intent of michelle.steves@nist.gov inducing the recipient to reveal sensitive information. Phishing continues to be an escalating cyber threat Digital Identity Guidelines facing organizations of all types and sizes, including industry, academia, and government. To help combat SP 800-63, Digital Identity Guidelines, was the phishing threat, many organizations utilize fnalized and published in June, 2017. After more than phishing awareness training to make employees a year of work NIST has released a suite of documents and students more aware of phishing threats and covering digital identity from initial risk assessment consequences. Phishing awareness training systems to deployment of federated identity solutions. The SP often use software to emulate real-world threats and suite has also been reorganized. SP 800-63-3 is the thus train people to recognize and avoid falling victim base document associated with SP 800-63A, 800- to phishing attacks. Using this type of embedded 63B, and 800-63C that covers the various components training system, researchers in the usability group of a digital identity system. partnered with NIST’s OISM (Ofce of Information Systems Management) and OSHE (Ofce of Safety In 2004, NIST published the initial version Health and Environment) to complete three phishing of Special Publication (SP) 800-63, Electronic awareness training exercises with corresponding Authentication Guideline. Since then, two revisions surveys, culminating a multi-year phishing awareness have been published, SP 800-63-2 being published evaluation. in August 2013. In late 2015, NIST started considering 117 a signifcant update to SP 800-63-2 in response to NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017market innovation, evolving federal requirements, development process can lead to authentication and an advanced threat landscape targeting remote solutions that are secure and usable while addressing authentication. As the frst step in revising the users’ authentication needs and organizations’ publication, NIST solicited recommendations from business goals. For SP 800-63C, Digital Identity experts (including those in industry, government, and Guidelines: Federation and Assertions, the usability educational felds) on which sections of the document chapter provides considerations and guidance to needed revision. Usability surfaced in many comments understand user perspectives on online identity, trust as always latent in many security considerations. and benefts, and user mental models and beliefs in The usability team was invited to participate in and order to promote good user experience with federated contribute to this year-long major revision efort. The identity systems. team participated in weekly meetings with the project FOR MORE INFORMATION, SEE: team, performed literature reviews, compiled results from our own usable security research, and wrote https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800- usability chapters in each of the suite of documents in 63/3/fnal the new SP 800-63. CONTACTS: Specifcally, for SP 800-63A, Digital Identity Mrs. Mary Theofanos Dr. Yee-Yin Choong Guidelines: Enrollment and Identity Proofng, the (301) 975-5889 (301) 975-3248 usability chapter was written to raise implementers’ mary.theofanos@nist.gov yee-yin.choong@nist.gov awareness of usability considerations associated with enrollment and identity proofng. For SP 800- Ms. Kristen Greene 63B, Digital Identity Guidelines: Authentication (301) 975-8119 and Lifecycle Management, the usability chapter kristen.greene@nist.gov provides usability considerations and guidance on authentication, as integrating usability into the 118 ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM AND PROJECTS | FY 2017HONORS AND AWARDS This section recognizes ITL staf who have received honors and/or awards for their cybersecurity accomplishments. 119 NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017NIST Bronze Medal Award The Bronze Medal Award is the highest recognition awarded by NIST. The award, approved by the Director, recognizes work that has resulted in more efective and efcient management systems as well as the demonstration of unusual initiative or creative ability in the development and improvement of methods and procedures. It is also given for signifcant contributions afecting major programs, scientifc accomplishments, and superior performance of assigned tasks for at least fve consecutive years. Jef Cichonski (Applied Cybersecurity Division); Lee Badger, Mike Bartock, David Cooper, Hildegard (Hildy) Ferraiolo, and Murugiah Souppaya (Computer Security Division); Paul Black and Barbara Guttman (Software and Systems Division). (Left to Right) Back row: B. Guttman, L. Badger, J. Cichonski, M. Bartock Front row: P. Black, H. Ferraiolo, D. Cooper Absent: M. Souppaya The group is recognized for addressing a series of near-term needs and providing a long-term strategy to improve our nation’s cybersecurity. The White House-led Cybersecurity National Action Plan of January 2016 prioritized critical cybersecurity areas and directed NIST to produce tools, references, and guidelines to help organizations strengthen the identifcation and authentication of privileged users, assist in recovering from cybersecurity incidents, self-assess their security capabilities, and identify methods to reduce vulnerabilities in software. The items developed by this team were exceptionally clear, consistent, and actionable, and have led to cybersecurity improvements in all sectors. 120 HONORS AND AWARDS | FY 2017Donna Dodson | One of CyberScoop’s 2017 Top Women in Cybersecurity Awarding Organization: CyberScoop Donna Dodson is the NIST chief cybersecurity advisor. Donna has been named one of CyberScoop’s 2017 Top Women in Cybersecurity! Donna Dodson has multiple roles at NlST. In addition to being the chief cybersecurity advisor to Acting NIST Director Kent Rochford, she is associate director of the Information Technology Laboratory — one of six labs at NIST — and director of the National Cybersecurity Center of Excellence. See NIST Press Release: https://www.nist.gov/about-us/nist-awards/donna- dodson-one-cyberscoops-2017-top-women-cybersecurity Source: https://www.cyberscoop.com/top-women-in-cybersecurity-donna-dodson/ Rodney Petersen | 2016 Government Leadership of the Year Awarding Organization: The Colloquium for Information Systems Security Education (CISSE) Rodney Petersen is the director of the National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE) at the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). He previously served as the Managing Director of the EDUCAUSE Washington Ofce and a Senior Government Relations Ofcer. He founded and directed the EDUCAUSE Cybersecurity Initiative and was the lead staf liaison for the Higher Education Information Security Council. Prior to joining EDUCAUSE, he worked at two diferent times for the University of Maryland - frst as Campus Compliance Ofcer in the Ofce of the President and later as the Director of IT Policy and Planning in the Ofce of the Vice President and Chief Information Ofcer. He also completed one year of federal service as an Instructor in the Academy for Community Service for AmeriCorps’ National Civilian Community Corps. He is the co-editor of a book entitled “Computer and Network Security in Higher Education.” He received his law degree from Wake Forest University and bachelors degrees in political science and business administration from Alma College. He was awarded a certifcate as an Advanced Graduate Specialist in Education Policy, Planning, and Administration from the University of Maryland. Source: https://cisse.info/about/award-recipients/634-2016-government-leadership-of-the-year-rodney-petersen 121 NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017Rodney Petersen and NICE Team - Received the Exemplary International Leadership in Cybersecurity Education and Workforce Development Award (Left to Right): William (Bill) Newhouse, Marian Merritt. Rodney Petersen, Danielle Santos, Clarence Williams, and Davina Pruitt-Mingle Awarding Organization: Cyber New Brunswick of Canada The National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE) team, which received an award for Exemplary International Leadership in Cybersecurity Education and Workforce Development from Cyber New Brunswick at Canada’s inaugural Cybersecurity Education and Workforce Summit (CyberSmart 2017). Source: https://www.nist.gov/about-us/nist-awards/rodney-petersen-and-nice-team-received-exemplary- international-leadership The National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE) was awarded a recognition plaque at the National Cybersecurity Summit Awarding Organization: National Cybersecurity Summit The National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE) Program Ofce received an honor of recognition at the National Cybersecurity Summit in Huntsville, Alabama. NICE received this award for its leadership in advancing cybersecurity education, training, and workforce development eforts for the nation. 122 HONORS AND AWARDS | FY 2017ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM PUBLICATIONS RELEASED IN FY 2017 This section provides a compilation of ITL cybersecurity publications released during FY 2017 (from October 1, 2016 to September 30, 2017). The frst portion lists technical documents, while the second portion provides abstracts that briefy summarize each document (technical and non-technical). 123 NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017DRAFT PUBLICATIONS There were no draft FIPS released during FY 2017. TABLE 5: SPECIAL PUBLICATIONS (SPs) PUBLICATION NUMBER TITLE DRAFT RELEASED SP 800-193 Platform Firmware Resiliency Guidelines May 2017 SP 800-191 The NIST Defnition of Fog Computing August 2017 April 2017 SP 800-190 (2 Drafts) Application Container Security Guide July 2017 SP 800-188 (2nd Draft) De-Identifying Government Datasets December 2016 SP 800-187 Guide to LTE Security November 2016 SP 800-177 Rev. 1 Trustworthy Email September 2017 SP 800-125A (2nd Draft) Security Recommendations for Hypervisor Deployment September 2017 National Checklist Program for IT Products: Guidelines for SP 800-70 Rev. 4 August 2017 Checklist Users and Developers Recommendation for the Triple Data Encryption SP 800-67 Rev. 2 July 2017 Algorithm (TDEA) Block Cipher Recommendation for Key Derivation through Extraction- SP 800-56C Rev. 1 August 2017 then-Expansion Recommendation for Pair-Wise Key-Establishment SP 800-56A Rev. 3 August 2017 Schemes Using Discrete Logarithm Cryptography Security and Privacy Controls for Information Systems SP 800-53 Rev. 5 August 2017 and Organizations SP 800-37 Rev. 2 Risk Management Framework for Information Systems (Discussion Draft) and Organizations: A System Life Cycle Approach for September 2017 Security and Privacy SP 1800-12 Derived Personal Identity Verifcation (PIV) Credentials September 2017 Data Integrity: Recovering from Ransomware and Other SP 1800-11 September 2017 Destructive Events Access Rights Management for the Financial Services SP 1800-9 August 2017 Sector Securing Wireless Infusion Pumps in Healthcare Delivery SP 1800-8 May 2017 Organizations SP 1800-7 Situational Awareness for Electric Utilities February 2017 SP 1800-6 Domain Name Systems-Based Electronic Mail Security November 2016 124 SP 1800-3 (2nd Draft) Attribute Based Access Control September 2017 ITL CYBERSECURITY PUBLICATIONS | FY 2017TABLE 6: NIST INTERNAL OR INTERAGENCY REPORTS (NISTIRs) PUBLICATION NUMBER TITLE DRAFT RELEASED Criticality Analysis Process Model: Prioritizing Systems NISTIR 8179 July 2017 and Components NISTIR 8176 Security Assurance Challenges for Container Deployment August 2017 The Cybersecurity Framework: Implementation Guidance NISTIR 8170 May 2017 for Federal Agencies Dramatically Reducing Software Vulnerabilities: Report to NISTIR 8151 October 2016 the White House Ofce of Science and Technology Policy NISTIR 8139 Identifying Uniformity with Entropy and Divergence February 2017 FINAL APPROVED PUBLICATIONS There were no FIPS released during FY 2017. 125 NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017TABLE 7: FINAL SPs PUBLICATION NUMBER TITLE FINAL RELEASED SP 800-195 2016 NIST/ITL Cybersecurity Program Annual Report September 2017 Verifcation and Test Methods for Access Control Policies/ SP 800-192 June 2017 Models SP 800-190 Application Container Security Guide September 2017 SHA-3 Derived Functions: cSHAKE, KMAC, TupleHash, and SP 800-185 December 2016 ParallelHash SP 800-184 Guide for Cybersecurity Event Recovery December 2016 National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE) SP 800-181 August 2017 Cybersecurity Workforce Framework Guide to Securing Apple OS X 10.10 Systems for IT SP 800-179 December 2016 Professionals: A NIST Security Confguration Checklist A Comparison of Attribute Based Access Control (ABAC) Standards for Data Service Applications: Extensible SP 800-178 October 2016 Access Control Markup Language (XACML) and Next Generation Access Control (NGAC) Protecting Controlled Unclassifed Information in SP 800-171 Rev. 1 December 2016 Nonfederal Information Systems and Organizations Systems Security Engineering: Considerations for November 2016 SP 800-160 a Multidisciplinary Approach in the Engineering of Trustworthy Secure Systems SP 800-150 Guide to Cyber Threat Information Sharing October 2016 SP 800-121 Rev. 2 Guide to Bluetooth Security May 2017 SP 800-70 Rev. 3 National Checklist Program for IT Products: Guidelines for December 2016 (update) Checklist Users and Developers SP 800-63-3 Digital Identity Guidelines June 2017 Digital Identity Guidelines: Enrollment and Identity SP 800-63A June 2017 Proofng Digital Identity Guidelines: Authentication and Lifecycle SP 800-63B June 2017 Management SP 800-63C Digital Identity Guidelines: Federation and Assertions June 2017 SP 800-38B Recommendation for Block Cipher Modes of (update) October 2016 Operation: the CMAC Mode for Authentication SP 800-12 Rev. 1 An Introduction to Information Security June 2017 Report of the Workshop on Software Measures and SP 500-320 Metrics to Reduce Security Vulnerabilities (SwMM- October 2016 126 RSV) ITL CYBERSECURITY PUBLICATIONS | FY 2017TABLE 8: FINAL NISTIRs PUBLICATION NUMBER TITLE FINAL RELEASED Enhancing Resilience of the Internet and Communications NISTIR 8192 September 2017 Ecosystem: a NIST Workshop Proceedings NISTIR 8183 Cybersecurity Framework Manufacturing Profle August 2017 NISTIR 8165 Impact of Code Complexity on Software Analysis February 2017 Dramatically Reducing Software Vulnerabilities: Report to NISTIR 8151 November 2016 the White House Ofce of Science and Technology Policy An Overview of Mobile Application Vetting Services for NISTIR 8136 January 2017 Public Safety NISTIR 8114 Report on Lightweight Cryptography March 2017 An Introduction to Privacy Engineering and Risk NISTIR 8062 January 2017 Management in Federal Systems Automation Support for Security Control Assessments: NISTIR 8011 Volume 1 June 2017 Overview Automation Support for Security Control Assessments: NISTIR 8011 Volume 2 June 2017 Hardware Asset Management NISTIR 7621 Rev. 1 Small Business Information Security: The Fundamentals November 2016 ITL BULLETINS TABLE 9: FY 2017 ITL BULLETINS PUBLICATION DATE BULLETIN TITLE September 2017 Updating the Keys for DNS Security August 2017 Understanding the Major Update to NIST SP 800-63: Digital Identity Guidelines July 2017 Updated NIST Guidance for Bluetooth Security June 2017 Toward Standardizing Lightweight Cryptography May 2017 Cyber-Threat Intelligence and Information Sharing April 2017 Building the Bridge Between Privacy and Cybersecurity for Federal Systems March 2017 Fundamentals of Small Business Information Security February 2017 Guide for Cybersecurity Incident Recovery January 2017 Dramatically Reducing Software Vulnerabilities December 2016 Rethinking Security Through Systems Security Engineering November 2016 Exploring the Next Generation of Access Control Methodologies 127 October 2016 Making Email Trustworthy NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017OTHER NIST PUBLICATIONS NIST released other publications in FY 2017, as “White Papers,” and as Concept Papers and Project Descriptions from NCCoE. TABLE 10: OTHER FY 2017 PUBLICATIONS PUBLICATION TYPE PUBLICATION TITLE RELEASE DATE Project Description Capabilities Assessment for Securing Manufacturing (Final) March 2017 Industrial Control Systems (Draft) November 2016 Project Description Mobile Application Single Sign-On: for Public Safety and (Final) First Responders November 2016 Project Description (Final) Secure Inter-Domain Routing--Part 1: Route Hijacks July 2017 (Draft) May 2017 Project Description Securing Property Management Systems: Cybersecurity (Final) September 2017 for the Hospitality Sector (Draft) April 2017 Project Description Trusted Geolocation in the Cloud (Draft) May 2017 Baldrige Cybersecurity Excellence Builder: Key questions White Paper (Final) for improving your organization's cybersecurity April 2017 performance White Paper (Draft) Cybersecurity Framework Manufacturing Profle March 2017 Framework for Improving Critical Infrastructure White Paper (Draft) January 2017 Cybersecurity, Version 1.1 Profles for the Lightweight Cryptography Standardization White Paper (Draft) April 2017 Process 128 ITL CYBERSECURITY PUBLICATIONS | FY 2017ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM 3. SP 800-63-3, Digital Identity Guidelines (49,535) RELATED PUBLICATIONS 4. SP 800-171 Rev. 1, Protecting Controlled Unclassifed Information in Nonfederal NIST Technical Series Publications Systems and Organizations (43,552) and Other NIST Publications 5. NISTIR 7621 Rev. 1, Small Business The tables above list NIST Technical Series Information Security: The Fundamentals cybersecurity publications posted by ITL—either (42,912) as draft or fnal publications—during FY 2017 (from October 1, 2016 to September 30, 2017). Abstracts and 6. SP 800-63B, Digital Identity Guidelines: links to the full text of these publications are provided Authentication and Lifecycle Management in the sections that follow. (40,152) During FY 2017, the ITL staf authored a signifcant number of standards, guidelines, recommendations 7. NISTIR 8151, Dramatically Reducing Software Vulnerabilities: Report to the White House and other research papers related to cybersecurity. Ofce of Science and Technology Policy These were published as NIST technical series (34,868) documents (e.g., Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS), Special Publications (SP), NIST Internal or Interagency Reports (NISTIRs), and 8. SP 800-181, National Initiative for Information Technology Laboratory (ITL) Bulletins), Cybersecurity Education (NICE) as other NIST publications, or as externally-published Cybersecurity Workforce Framework (31,782) documents (e.g., journal articles, conference papers, books, and other papers). 9. SP 800-179, Guide to Securing Apple OS X 10.10 Systems for IT Professionals: A NIST In FY 2017, ITL published 20 NIST Special Security Confguration Checklist (25,851) Publications, 10 NISTIRs and 12 ITL Bulletins in the areas of cybersecurity and privacy. Additionally, 10. SP 800-63A, Digital Identity Guidelines: ITL continued to engage stakeholders by posting Enrollment and Identity Proofng (14,699) numerous draft documents for public comment, including 21 Special Publications, 5 NISTIRs, 4 NCCoE Project Descriptions, and 4 NIST “white papers.” ITL Top 10 Most-Downloaded FIPS/SPs/NISTIRs– research was also published externally as 15 journal all years articles, 17 conference papers and 2 external “white papers.” They are listed in the following sections, with 1. SP 800-53 Rev. 4, Security and Privacy abstracts. Controls for Federal Information Systems and Organizations (376,759 downloads) Top 10 Most Downloaded FIPS/SPs/NISTIRs – 2. SP 800-61 Rev. 2, Computer Security published in FY 2017 Incident Handling Guide (185,976) 1. SP 800-160, Systems Security Engineering: 3. SP 800-145, The NIST Defnition of Cloud Considerations for a Multidisciplinary Computing (147,801) Approach in the Engineering of Trustworthy Secure Systems (54,557 downloads) 4. SP 800-171, Protecting Controlled Unclassifed Information in Nonfederal 2. SP 800-184, Guide for Cybersecurity Event Information Systems and Organizations Recovery (49,929) (147,208) 129 NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 20175. SP 800-30 Rev. 1, Guide for Conducting Risk Abstracts of Publications Released in Assessments (112,526) FY 2017 6. SP 800-88 Rev. 1, Guidelines for Media The following sections provide abstracts of Sanitization (77,150) security- and privacy-related NIST Special Publications 7. SP 800-82 Rev. 2, Guide to Industrial Control (SP), NIST Internal or Interagency Reports (NISTIR), Systems (ICS) Security (66,663) and other NIST publications listed in the previous section. If a publication was released as a draft 8. SP 800-53A Rev. 4, Assessing Security and fnal publication during FY 2017, only the fnal and Privacy Controls in Federal Information publication is listed below. Any updated publications, Systems and Organizations: Building Efective with minor technical or editorial changes, identifed Assessment Plans (65,389) in the tables above as “updates,” are not listed below. Technical reports (SP and NISTIR series) are arranged 9. NISTIR 7298 Rev. 2, Glossary of Key in reverse numerical order by report number. Information Security Terms (57,689) 10. SP 800-160, Systems Security Engineering: Considerations for a Multidisciplinary NIST SPECIAL PUBLICATIONS (SP) Approach in the Engineering of Trustworthy SP 800 SERIES – COMPUTER Secure Systems (54,557) SECURITY FY 2018 Plans SP 800-195 The Computer Security Division will leverage the 2016 NIST/ITL Cybersecurity Program Annual capabilities of the new CSRC platform to enhance the Report searching and browsing functionality of the website’s September 2017 publications section. The CSRC development team https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800- will also explore ways to improve the automated 195/fnal sharing of publication information with other NIST https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-195 ofces. Finally, NIST will continue to expand its library of cybersecurity and privacy publications, both Title III of the E-Government Act of 2002, entitled through NIST technical publication series and external the Federal Information Security Management Act publishing opportunities. (FISMA) of 2002, requires NIST to prepare an annual public report on activities undertaken in the previous FOR MORE INFORMATION, SEE: year, and planned for the coming year, to carry out https://csrc.nist.gov/publications responsibilities under this law. The primary goal of the NIST’s Information Technology Laboratory (ITL) CONTACTS: Cybersecurity Program, is to provide standards Mr. Jim Foti Mr. Patrick O’Reilly and technology that protects information systems (301) 975-8018 (301) 975-4751 against threats to the confdentiality, integrity, and jfoti@nist.gov patrick.oreilly@nist.gov availability of information and services. During Fiscal Year 2016 (FY 2016), the ITL Cybersecurity Program successfully responded to numerous challenges and opportunities in fulflling that mission. Through ITL’s diverse research agenda and engagement in many national priority initiatives, high-quality, cost- efective security and privacy mechanisms were developed and applied that improved information security across the Federal Government and the 130 greater information security community. This annual ITL CYBERSECURITY PUBLICATIONS | FY 2017report highlights the research agenda and activities properties that access control should adhere to, in which ITL Cybersecurity Program was engaged access control models are usually written, bridging during FY 2016. the gap in abstraction between policies and mechanisms. Identifying discrepancies between SP 800-193 (DRAFT) policy specifcations and their intended function Platform Firmware Resiliency Guidelines is crucial because correct implementation and May 2017 (public comment period: May 30 – July enforcement of policies by applications is based 14, 2017) on the premise that the policy specifcations are https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800- correct. As a result, policy specifcations represented 193/draft by models must undergo rigorous verifcation and validation through systematic verifcation and This document provides technical guidelines testing to ensure that the policy specifcations and recommendations supporting the resiliency truly encapsulate the desires of the policy authors. of platform frmware and data against potentially Verifying the conformance of access control policies destructive attacks. The platform is a collection and models is a non-trivial and critical task, and one of the fundamental hardware and frmware important aspect of such verifcation is to formally components needed to boot and operate a check the inconsistency and incompleteness of the system. A successful attack on platform frmware model and safety requirements of the policy, because could render a system inoperable, perhaps an access control model and its implementation do permanently or requiring reprogramming by not necessarily explicitly express the policy, which the original manufacturer, resulting in signifcant can also be implicitly embedded by mixing with disruptions to users. The technical guidelines in this direct access constraints or other access control document promote resiliency in the platform by models. describing security mechanisms for protecting the platform against unauthorized changes, detecting SP 800-191 (DRAFT) unauthorized changes that occur, and recovery The NIST Defnition of Fog Computing from attacks rapidly and securely. Implementers, August 2017 (public comment period: August 21 – including Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs) September 21, 2017) and component/device suppliers, can use these https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800- guidelines to build stronger security mechanisms 191/draft into platforms. System administrators, security professionals, and users can use this document Managing the data generated by Internet to guide procurement strategies and priorities for of Things (IoT) sensors is one of the biggest future systems. challenges faced when deploying an IoT system. Traditional cloud-based IoT systems are challenged SP 800-192 by the large scale, heterogeneity, and high latency Verifcation and Test Methods for Access Control witnessed in some cloud ecosystems. One solution Policies/Models is to decentralize applications, management, June 2017 and data analytics into the network itself using a https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800- distributed and federated computing model. This 192/fnal approach has become known as fog computing. https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-192 This document presents a formal defnition of fog and mist computing and how they relate to cloud- Access control systems are among the most based computing models for IoT. This document critical of computer security components. Faulty further characterizes important properties and policies, misconfgurations, or faws in software aspects of fog computing, including service models, implementations can result in serious vulnerabilities. deployment strategies, and provides a baseline of To formally and precisely capture the security what fog computing is, and how it may be used. 131 NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017SP 800-190 use of formal privacy models. People performing Application Container Security Guide de-identifcation generally use special-purpose September 2017 (also issued as two public drafts software tools to perform the data manipulation and during FY 2017) calculate the likely risk of re-identifcation. However, https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800- not all tools that merely mask personal information 190/fnal provide sufcient functionality for performing https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-190 de-identifcation. This document also includes an extensive list of references, a glossary, and a list Application container technologies, also of specifc de-identifcation tools, although the known as containers, are a form of operating mention of these tools is only to be used to convey system virtualization combined with application the range of tools currently available, and is not software packaging. Containers provide a portable, intended to imply recommendation or endorsement reusable, and automatable way to package and by NIST. run applications. This publication explains the potential security concerns associated with the use SP 800-187 (DRAFT) of containers and provides recommendations for Guide to LTE Security addressing these concerns. November 2017 (public comment period: November 21 – December 22, 2017) SP 800-188 (2nd DRAFT) https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800- De-Identifying Government Datasets 187/draft December 2016 (public comment period: December 15-31, 2016) Cellular technology plays an increasingly large https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800- role in society, as it has become the primary portal 188/draft to the Internet for a large segment of the population. One of the main drivers making this change possible De-identifcation is a process that is applied to is the deployment of 4th generation (4G) Long a dataset to reduce the risk of linking information Term Evolution (LTE) cellular technologies. This revealed in the dataset to specifc individuals. document serves as a guide to the fundamentals Government agencies can use de-identifcation to of how LTE networks operate and explores the LTE reduce the privacy risk associated with collecting, security architecture. This is followed by an analysis processing, archiving, distributing or publishing of the threats posed to LTE networks and supporting government data. Previously NIST published NISTIR mitigations. 8053, De-Identifcation of Personal Information, which provided a survey of de-identifcation and re- SP 800-185 identifcation techniques. This document provides SHA-3 Derived Functions: cSHAKE, KMAC, specifc guidance to government agencies that TupleHash, and ParallelHash wish to use de-identifcation. Before using de- December 2016 identifcation, agencies should evaluate their goals https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800- in using de-identifcation and the potential risks 185/fnal that de-identifcation might create. Agencies should https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-185 decide upon a de-identifcation release model, such This Recommendation specifes four SHA-3- as publishing de-identifed data, publishing synthetic derived functions: cSHAKE, KMAC, TupleHash, and data based on identifed data, or providing a query ParallelHash. cSHAKE is a customizable variant of interface that incorporates de-identifcation of the the SHAKE functions defned in FIPS 202. KMAC identifed data. Agencies can create a Disclosure Review Board to oversee the process of de- (for KECCAK Message Authentication Code) is a variable-length message authentication code identifcation; they can also adopt a de-identifcation standard with measurable performance levels. algorithm based on KECCAK; it can also be used as a pseudorandom function. TupleHash is a variable- Several specifc techniques for de-identifcation are length hash function designed to hash tuples of available, including de-identifcation by removing 132 input strings unambiguously. ParallelHash is a identifers, transforming quasi-identifers and the ITL CYBERSECURITY PUBLICATIONS | FY 2017variable-length hash function that can hash very the NICE Framework improves communication long messages in parallel. about how to identify, recruit, develop, and retain cybersecurity talent. The NICE Framework is a SP 800-184 reference source from which organizations or Guide for Cybersecurity Event Recovery sectors can develop additional publications or tools December 2016 that meet their needs to defne or provide guidance https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800- on diferent aspects of cybersecurity workforce 184/fnal development, planning, training, and education. https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-184 SP 800-179 In light of an increasing number of cybersecurity Guide to Securing Apple OS X 10.10 Systems for events, organizations can improve resilience by IT Professionals: A NIST Security Confguration ensuring that their risk management processes Checklist include comprehensive recovery planning. December 2016 Identifying and prioritizing organization resources https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800- helps to guide efective plans and realistic test 179/fnal scenarios. This preparation enables rapid recovery https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-179 from incidents when they occur and helps to minimize the impact on the organization and its This publication assists IT professionals in constituents. Additionally, continually improving securing Apple OS X 10.10 desktop and laptop recovery planning by learning lessons from past systems within various environments. It provides events, including those of other organizations, detailed information about the security features of helps to ensure the continuity of important mission OS X 10.10 and security confguration guidelines. functions. This publication provides tactical and The publication recommends and explains tested, strategic guidance regarding the planning, playbook secure settings with the objective of simplifying the development, testing, and improvement of recovery administrative burden of improving the security of planning. It also provides an example scenario that OS X 10.10 systems in three types of environments: demonstrates guidance and informative metrics Standalone, Managed, and Specialized Security- that may be helpful for improving resilience of Limited Functionality. information systems. SP 800-178 SP 800-181 A Comparison of Attribute Based Access Control National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (ABAC) Standards for Data Service Applications: (NICE) Cybersecurity Workforce Framework Extensible Access Control Markup Language August 2017 (XACML) and Next Generation Access Control https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800- (NGAC) 181/fnal October 2016 https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-181 https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800- 178/fnal This publication describes the National https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-178 Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE) Cybersecurity Workforce Framework (NICE The Extensible Access Control Markup Framework), a reference structure that describes Language (XACML) and Next Generation Access the interdisciplinary nature of the cybersecurity Control (NGAC) are very diferent Attribute Based work. It serves as a fundamental reference resource Access Control (ABAC) standards with similar goals for describing and sharing information about and objectives. An objective of both is to provide cybersecurity work and the knowledge, skills, and a standardized way for expressing and enforcing abilities (KSAs) needed to complete tasks that vastly diverse access control policies on various can strengthen the cybersecurity posture of an types of data services. However, the two standards organization. As a common, consistent lexicon difer with respect to the manner in which access 133 that categorizes and describes cybersecurity work, control policies are specifed and implemented. This NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017document describes XACML and NGAC, and then provides federal agencies with recommended compares them with respect to fve criteria. The goal requirements for protecting the confdentiality of this publication is to help ABAC users and vendors of CUI: (i) when the CUI is resident in nonfederal make informed decisions when addressing future information systems and organizations; (ii) when the data service policy enforcement requirements. information systems where the CUI resides are not used or operated by contractors of federal agencies SP 800-177 Revision 1 (DRAFT) or other organizations on behalf of those agencies; Trustworthy Email and (iii) where there are no specifc safeguarding September 2017 (public comment period: requirements for protecting the confdentiality of September 13 – October 13, 2017) CUI prescribed by the authorizing law, regulation, https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800- or government-wide policy for the CUI category 177/rev-1/draft or subcategory listed in the CUI Registry. The requirements apply to all components of nonfederal This document gives recommendations and information systems and organizations that process, guidelines for enhancing trust in email. The primary store, or transmit CUI, or provide security protection audience includes enterprise email administrators, for such components. The CUI requirements are information security specialists and network intended for use by federal agencies in contractual managers. This guideline applies to federal IT vehicles or other agreements established between systems and will also be useful for small or medium- those agencies and nonfederal organizations. sized organizations. Technologies recommended in support of core Simple Mail Transfer Protocol SP 800-160 (SMTP) and the Domain Name System (DNS) Systems Security Engineering: Considerations for include mechanisms for authenticating a sending a Multidisciplinary Approach in the Engineering of domain: Sender Policy Framework (SPF), Trustworthy Secure Systems Domain Keys Identifed Mail (DKIM) and Domain November 2016 based Message Authentication, Reporting and https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800- Conformance (DMARC). Recommendations for 160/fnal email transmission security include Transport https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-160 Layer Security (TLS) and associated certifcate authentication protocols. Recommendations for With the continuing frequency, intensity, and email content security include the encryption and adverse consequences of cyber-attacks, disruptions, authentication of message content using S/MIME hazards, and other threats to federal, state, and (Secure/Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions) and local governments, the military, businesses, and associated certifcate and key distribution protocols. the critical infrastructure, the need for trustworthy secure systems has never been more important SP 800-171 Revision 1 to the long-term economic and national security Protecting Controlled Unclassifed Information interests of the United States. Engineering-based in Nonfederal Information Systems and solutions are essential to managing the growing Organizations complexity, dynamicity, and interconnectedness December 2016 of today’s systems, as exemplifed by cyber- https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800- physical systems and systems-of-systems, 171/rev-1/fnal including the Internet of Things. This publication https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-171r1 addresses the engineering-driven perspective and actions necessary to develop more defensible The protection of Controlled Unclassifed and survivable systems, inclusive of the machine, Information (CUI) while residing in nonfederal physical, and human components that compose the information systems and organizations is of systems and the capabilities and services delivered paramount importance to federal agencies and by those systems. It starts with and builds upon a can directly impact the ability of the Federal set of well-established International Standards for Government to successfully carry out its designated systems and software engineering published by 134 missions and business operations. This publication ITL CYBERSECURITY PUBLICATIONS | FY 2017the International Organization for Standardization The Hypervisor is a piece of software that (ISO), the International Electrotechnical Commission provides an abstraction of all physical resources (IEC), and the Institute of Electrical and Electronics (such as CPU, Memory, Network and Storage) and Engineers (IEEE) and infuses systems security thus enables multiple computing stacks (basically engineering methods, practices, and techniques made of an O/S and application programs, and into those systems and software engineering optionally a middleware in some instances) activities. The objective is to address security called Virtual Machines (VMs) to be run on a issues from the protection needs, concerns, and single physical host. In addition, it may have the requirements of perspective stakeholders and to functionality to defne a network within the single use established engineering processes to ensure physical host (called a virtual network) to enable that such needs, concerns, and requirements are communication among the VMs resident on that addressed with appropriate fdelity and rigor, early host as well as with physical and virtual machines and in a sustainable manner throughout the life outside the host. With all this functionality, the cycle of the system. hypervisor has the responsibility to mediate access to physical resources, provide run-time isolation SP 800-150 among resident VMs and enable a virtual network Guide to Cyber Threat Information Sharing that provides security-preserving communication October 2016 fow among the VMs and between the VMs and https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800- the external network. To design a hypervisor with 150/fnal the core functionality described above, there are https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-150 architectural options, with each option presenting a diferent size of Trusted Computing Base (TCB) Cyber threat information is any information and hence, a diferent degree of ease in providing that can help an organization identify, assess, the required security assurance. Hence, in providing monitor, and respond to cyber threats. Cyber threat security recommendations for the hypervisor, two information includes indicators of compromise; diferent approaches have been adopted in this tactics, techniques, and procedures used by threat document – one approach based on architectural actors; suggested actions to detect, contain, or options that provide the ease of security assurance prevent attacks; and the fndings from the analyses and the second approach based on confguration of incidents. Organizations that share cyber choices that form part of its core administrative threat information can improve their own security functions such as the management of VMs, postures as well as those of other organizations. This hypervisor host, hypervisor software and virtual publication provides guidelines for establishing and networks. participating in cyber threat information sharing relationships. This guidance helps organizations SP 800-121 Revision 2 establish information sharing goals, identify cyber Guide to Bluetooth Security threat information sources, scope information- May 2017 sharing activities, develop rules that control the https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800- publication and distribution of threat information, 121/rev-2/fnal engage with existing sharing communities, and https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-121r2 make efective use of threat information in support of the organization’s overall cybersecurity practices. Bluetooth wireless technology is an open standard for short-range radio frequency SP 800-125A (2nd Draft) communication that is used primarily to establish Security Recommendations for Hypervisor wireless personal area networks (WPANs) that Deployment has been integrated into many types of business September 2017 (public comment period: and consumer devices. This publication provides September 14 – October 6, 2017) information on the security capabilities of Bluetooth https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800- and gives recommendations to organizations 135 125a/draft employing Bluetooth regarding how to secure those NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017wireless technologies efectively. The Bluetooth integrity of the information represented by the data. versions within the scope of this publication are This Recommendation defnes the mathematical versions 1.1, 1.2, 2.0 + Enhanced Data Rate (EDR), steps required to cryptographically protect data 2.1 + EDR, 3.0 + High Speed (HS), 4.0, 4.1, and 4.2. using TDEA and to subsequently process such Versions 4.0 and later support the low energy protected data. TDEA is made available for use by feature of Bluetooth. federal agencies within the context of a total security program consisting of physical security procedures, SP 800-70 Revision 4 (DRAFT) good information management practices, and National Checklist Program for IT Products: computer system/network access controls. Guidelines for Checklist Users and Developers August 2017 (public comment period: August 1-30, SP 800-63-3 2017) Digital Identity Guidelines https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800- June 2017 70/rev-4/draft https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800- 63/3/fnal A security confguration checklist is a document https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-63-3 that contains instructions or procedures for confguring an information technology (IT) product These guidelines provide technical requirements to an operational environment, for verifying that for federal agencies implementing digital identity the product has been confgured properly, and/ services and are not intended to constrain the or for identifying unauthorized changes to the development or use of standards outside of this product. Using these checklists can minimize purpose. The guidelines cover identity proofng the attack surface, reduce vulnerabilities, lessen and authentication of users (such as employees, the impact of successful attacks, and identify contractors, or private individuals) interacting with changes that might otherwise go undetected. To government IT systems over open networks. They facilitate the development of checklists and to defne technical requirements in each of the areas make checklists more organized and usable, NIST of identity proofng, registration, authenticators, established the National Checklist Program (NCP). management processes, authentication protocols, This publication explains how to use the NCP to federation, and related assertions. This publication fnd and retrieve checklists, and it also describes the supersedes SP 800-63-2. policies, procedures, and general requirements for SP 800-63A participation in the NCP. Digital Identity Guidelines: Enrollment and SP 800-67 Revision 2 (DRAFT) Identity Proofng Recommendation for the Triple Data Encryption June 2017 Algorithm (TDEA) Block Cipher https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800- July 2017 (public comment period: July 18 – 63a/fnal October 2, 2017) https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-63a https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800-67/ These guidelines provide technical requirements rev-2/draft for federal agencies implementing digital identity This publication specifes the Triple Data services and are not intended to constrain the Encryption Algorithm (TDEA), including its primary development or use of standards outside of this component cryptographic engine, the Data purpose. This guideline focuses on the enrollment Encryption Algorithm (DEA). When implemented in and verifcation of an identity for use in digital an SP 800-38-series-compliant mode of operation authentication. Central to this is a process known and in a FIPS 140-2-compliant cryptographic as identity proofng in which applicants provide module, TDEA may be used by federal organizations evidence to a credential service provider (CSP) that to protect sensitive unclassifed data. Protection of reliably identifes them, thereby allowing the CSP data during transmission or while in storage may to assert that identifcation is at a useful identity 136 be necessary to maintain the confdentiality and assurance level. This document defnes technical ITL CYBERSECURITY PUBLICATIONS | FY 2017requirements for each of three identity assurance provide authentication and (optionally) subscriber levels. This publication supersedes corresponding attributes to a number of separately-administered sections of SP 800-63-2. relying parties. Similarly, relying parties may use more than one credential service provider. SP 800-63B Digital Identity Guidelines: Authentication and SP 800-56C Revision 1 (DRAFT) Lifecycle Management Recommendation for Key Derivation Methods in June 2017 Key-Establishment Schemes https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800- August 2017 (public comment period: August 7 – 63b/fnal November 6, 2017) https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-63b https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800- 56c/rev-1/draft These guidelines provide technical requirements for federal agencies implementing This Recommendation specifes techniques digital identity services and are not intended to for the derivation of keying material from a shared constrain the development or use of standards secret established during a key-establishment outside of this purpose. These guidelines focus scheme defned in SP 800-56A or SP 800-56B. on the authentication of subjects interacting SP 800-56A Revision 3 (DRAFT) with government systems over open networks, Recommendation for Pair-Wise Key- establishing that a given claimant is a subscriber Establishment Schemes Using Discrete Logarithm who has been previously authenticated. The result Cryptography of the authentication process may be used locally by August 2017 (public comment period: August 7 – the system performing the authentication or may be November 6, 2017) asserted elsewhere in a federated identity system. https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800- This document defnes technical requirements for 56a/rev-3/draft each of the three authenticator assurance levels. This publication supersedes corresponding sections This Recommendation specifes key- of SP 800-63-2. establishment schemes based on the discrete logarithm problem over fnite felds and elliptic SP 800-63C curves, including several variations of Dife- Digital Identity Guidelines: Federation and Hellman and Menezes-Qu-Vanstone (MQV) key- Assertions establishment schemes. June 2017 https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800- SP 800-53 Revision 5 (DRAFT) 63c/fnal Security and Privacy Controls for Information https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-63c Systems and Organizations August 2017 (public comment period: August 15 – This document and its companion documents, September 12, 2017) SP 800-63, SP 800-63A, and SP 800-63B, provide https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800- technical and procedural guidelines to agencies 53/rev-5/draft for the implementation of federated identity systems and for assertions used by federations. This This publication provides a catalog publication supersedes corresponding sections of of security and privacy controls for federal SP 800-63-2. These guidelines provide technical information systems and organizations to protect requirements for federal agencies implementing organizational operations and assets, individuals, digital identity services and are not intended to other organizations, and the nation from a constrain the development or use of standards diverse set of threats including hostile attacks, outside of this purpose. This guideline focuses on the natural disasters, structural failures, human errors, use of federated identity and the use of assertions and privacy risks. The controls are fexible and to implement identity federations. Federation customizable and implemented as part of an 137 allows a given credential service provider to organization-wide process to manage risk. The NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017controls address diverse requirements derived and privacy controls deployed within organizational from mission and business needs, laws, Executive systems and inherited by those systems. The RMF Orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards, incorporates concepts from the Framework for and guidelines. The publication describes how to Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity develop specialized sets of controls, or overlays that complements the currently established risk that are tailored for specifc types of missions and management processes mandated by the Ofce business functions, technologies, environments of of Management and Budget and the Federal operation, and sector-specifc applications. Finally, Information Security Modernization Act. the consolidated catalog of controls addresses SP 800-12 Revision 1 security and privacy from a functionality perspective An Introduction to Information Security (i.e., the strength of functions and mechanisms) June 2017 and an assurance perspective (i.e., the measure of https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800-12/ confdence in the security or privacy capability). rev-1/fnal Addressing both functionality and assurance https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-12r1 ensures that information technology products and the information systems that rely on those products Organizations rely heavily on the use of are sufciently trustworthy. information technology (IT) products and services to run their day-to-day activities. Ensuring the security SP 800-37 Revision 2 (Discussion Draft) of these products and services is of the utmost Risk Management Framework for Information importance for the success of the organization. Systems and Organizations: A System Life Cycle This publication introduces the information security Approach for Security and Privacy principles that organizations may leverage to September 2017 understand the information security needs of their https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800-37/ respective systems. rev-2/draft This publication provides guidelines for applying the Risk Management Framework (RMF) SP 1800 SERIES – CYBERSECURITY to information systems and organizations. The PRACTICE GUIDES RMF includes a disciplined, structured, and fexible process for organizational asset valuation; security and privacy control selection, implementation, and SP 1800-12 (DRAFT) assessment; system and control authorizations; and Derived Personal Identity Verifcation (PIV) continuous monitoring. It also includes enterprise- Credentials level activities to better prepare organizations September 2017 (public comment period: to execute the RMF at the system level. The RMF September 29 – November 29, 2017) promotes the concept of near real-time risk https://nccoe.nist.gov/projects/building-blocks/ management and ongoing system authorization piv-credentials through the implementation of continuous monitoring processes; provides senior leaders Federal Information Processing (FIPS) Standards and executives with the necessary information to Publication 201-2, Personal Identity Verifcation make cost-efective, risk management decisions (PIV) of Federal Employees and Contractors, about the systems supporting their missions and establishes a standard for a PIV system based on business functions; and integrates security and secure and reliable forms of identity credentials privacy controls into the system development life that are issued by the Federal Government to its cycle. Applying the RMF tasks enterprise-wide employees and contractors. These credentials are helps to link essential risk management processes intended to authenticate individuals who require at the system level to risk management processes access to federally controlled facilities, information at the organization level. In addition, it establishes systems, and applications. 138 responsibility and accountability for the security ITL CYBERSECURITY PUBLICATIONS | FY 2017In 2005, when FIPS 201 was frst published, logical activities, and even honest mistakes that can alter access was geared toward traditional computing or destroy critical data. These data corruption devices (i.e., desktop and laptop computers), where events could cause a signifcant loss to a company’s the PIV card provides common authentication reputation, business operations, and bottom line. mechanisms through integrated smart card readers These types of adverse events that ultimately across the Federal Government. With the emergence impact data integrity can compromise critical of computing devices such as tablets, convertible corporate information, including emails, employee computers, and, in particular, mobile devices, the records, fnancial records, and customer data. It is use of PIV cards has proved challenging. Mobile imperative for organizations to recover quickly from devices lack the integrated smart card readers a data integrity attack and trust the accuracy and found in laptop and desktop computers and require precision of the recovered data. The NCCoE at NIST separate card readers attached to devices to provide built a laboratory environment to explore methods authentication services. To extend the value of PIV to efectively recover from a data corruption event systems into mobile devices that do not have PIV in various Information Technology (IT) enterprise Card readers, NIST developed technical guidelines environments. NCCoE also implemented the on the implementation or lifecycle of identity auditing and reporting IT system use to support credentials that are issued by federal departments incident recovery and investigations. This NIST and agencies to individuals who possess and prove Cybersecurity Practice Guide demonstrates how control over a valid PIV card. organizations can implement technologies to take immediate action following a data corruption These NIST guidelines, published in 2014, event. The example solution outlined in this describe Derived PIV Credentials (DPCs), which guide encourages the efective monitoring and leverage the identity proofng and vetting results of detection of data corruption in standard, enterprise current and valid PIV credentials. To demonstrate components as well as custom applications and the DPC’s guidelines, the NCCoE at NIST built data composed of open-source and commercially a security architecture in its laboratory using available components. commercial technology to manage the lifecycle of DPCs, demonstrating the process that enables a PIV SP 1800-9 (DRAFT) Card holder to establish DPCs in a mobile device Access Rights Management for the Financial that then can be used to allow the PIV Card holder Services Sector to access websites that require PIV authentication. August 2017 (public comment period: August 31 – This project resulted in a freely available NIST October 31, 2017) Cybersecurity Practice Guide that demonstrates https://nccoe.nist.gov/projects/use-cases/access- how an organization can continue to provide two- rights-management factor authentication for users with a mobile device Managing access to resources (data) is that leverages the strengths of the PIV standard. complicated because internal systems multiply Although this project is primarily aimed at the and acquisitions add to the complexity of an federal sector’s needs, it is also relevant to mobile organization’s IT infrastructure. Identity and access device users with smart card based credentials in management (IdAM) is the set of technology, the private sector. policies, and processes that are used to manage SP 1800-11 (DRAFT) access to resources. Access rights management Data Integrity: Recovering from Ransomware and (ARM) is the subset of those technologies, policies, Other Destructive Events and processes that manage the rights of individuals September 2017 (public comment period: and systems to access resources (data). In other September 6 – November 6, 2017) words, an ARM system enables a company to https://nccoe.nist.gov/projects/building-blocks/ give the right person the right access to the right data-integrity resources at the right time. 139 Businesses face a near-constant threat of The goal of this project is to demonstrate an destructive malware, ransomware, malicious insider ARM solution that is a standards-based technical NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017approach to coordinating and automating May 2017 (public comment period: May 8 – July 7, updates to and improving the security of the 2017) repositories (directories) that maintain the user https://nccoe.nist.gov/projects/use_cases/ access information across an organization. The medical_devices coordination improves cybersecurity by ensuring Medical devices, such as infusion pumps, were that user access information is updated accurately once standalone instruments that interacted only (according to access policies), including disabling with the patient or medical provider. But today’s accounts or revoking access privileges as user medical devices connect to a variety of health resource access needs change. Cybersecurity care systems, networks, and other tools within a is also improved through better monitoring for healthcare delivery organization (HDO). Connecting unauthorized changes (e.g., privilege escalation). devices to point-of-care medication systems and The system executes user access changes across the electronic health records can improve healthcare enterprise according to corporate access policies delivery processes; however, increasing the quickly, simultaneously, and consistently. connectivity capabilities also creates cybersecurity The ARM reference design and example risks. Potential threats include unauthorized access implementation are described in this NIST to patient health information, changes to prescribed Cybersecurity “Access Rights Management” practice drug doses, and interference with a pump’s function. guide. This project resulted from discussions among The NCCoE at NIST analyzed risk factors in NCCoE staf and members of the fnancial services and around the infusion pump ecosystem using a sector. This NIST Cybersecurity Practice Guide also questionnaire-based risk assessment to develop describes our collaborative eforts with technology an example implementation that demonstrates providers and fnancial services stakeholders to how HDOs can use standards-based, commercially address the security challenges of ARM. It provides a available cybersecurity technologies to better modular, open, end-to-end example implementation protect the infusion pump ecosystem, including that can be tailored to fnancial services companies patient information and drug library dosing limits. of varying sizes and sophistication. The use case This practice guide will help HDOs implement scenario that provides the underlying impetus for current cybersecurity standards and best practices the functionality presented in the guide is based on to reduce their cybersecurity risk, while maintaining normal day-to-day business operations. Although the performance and usability of wireless infusion the reference solution was demonstrated with a pumps. certain suite of products, the guide does not endorse these specifc products. Instead, it presents the NIST SP 1800-7 (DRAFT) Cybersecurity Framework (CSF) core functions Situational Awareness for Electric Utilities and subcategories, as well as the fnancial industry February 2017 (public comment period: February guidelines that a company’s security personnel can 16 – April 17, 2017) use to identify similar standards-based products https://nccoe.nist.gov/projects/use_cases/ that can be integrated quickly and cost-efectively situational_awareness with a company’s existing tools and infrastructure. This NIST Cybersecurity Practice Guide Planning for the deployment of the design gives describes our collaborative eforts with technology an organization the opportunity to review and audit providers and energy-sector stakeholders to address the access control information in their directories the security challenges that energy providers and get a more global, correlated, disambiguated face in deploying a comprehensive situational view of the user access roles and attributes that are awareness capability. It ofers a technical approach currently in efect. to meeting the challenge, and also incorporates a business-value mind-set by identifying the SP 1800-8 (DRAFT) strategic considerations involved in implementing Securing Wireless Infusion Pumps in Healthcare new technologies. The guide provides a modular, Delivery Organizations 140 ITL CYBERSECURITY PUBLICATIONS | FY 2017end-to-end example solution that can be tailored guide details a collaborative efort between the and implemented by energy providers of varying NCCoE and technology providers to demonstrate sizes and sophistication. It shows energy providers a standards-based approach to Attribute Based how we met the challenge using open source and Access Control (ABAC). This guide discusses commercially available tools and technologies that potential security risks facing organizations, are consistent with cybersecurity standards. The use benefts that may result from the implementation of case is based on an everyday operational business an ABAC system, and the approach that the NCCoE scenario that provides the underlying impetus for took in developing a reference architecture and the functionality presented in the guide. Test cases build. It includes a discussion of major architecture were defned with industry participation to provide design considerations, an explanation of security multiple examples of the capabilities necessary to characteristics achieved by the reference design, provide situational awareness. and a mapping of the security characteristics to applicable standards and security control families. SP 1800-6 (DRAFT) For parties interested in adopting all or part of the Domain Name Systems-Based Electronic Mail NCCoE reference architecture, this guide includes a Security detailed description of the installation, confguration, November 2016 (public comment period: and integration of all components. November 2 – December 19, 2016) https://nccoe.nist.gov/projects/building-blocks/ secured-email SP 500 SERIES—COMPUTER This document proposes a reference guide on SYSTEMS TECHNOLOGY how to architect, install, and confgure a security platform for trustworthy email exchanges across organizational boundaries. The project includes SP 500-320 reliable authentication of mail servers, digitally Report of the Workshop on Software Measures signing and encrypting email, and binding and Metrics to Reduce Security Vulnerabilities cryptographic key certifcates to sources and (SwMM-RSV) servers. The example solutions and architectures November 2016 presented are based upon standards-based and https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.500-320 commercially available products. The example solutions presented can be used by any organization The NIST workshop on Software Measures and implementing Domain Name System-based Metrics to Reduce Security Vulnerabilities (SwMM- electronic mail security. RSV) was held on 12 July 2016. The goal of this workshop was to gather ideas on how the Federal SP 1800-3 (2nd DRAFT) Government can identify, improve, package, deliver, Attribute Based Access Control September 2017 (public comment period: or boost the use of software measures and metrics September 20 – October 20, 2017) to signifcantly reduce vulnerabilities. https://nccoe.nist.gov/projects/building-blocks/ This report contains observations and attribute-based-access-control recommendations from the workshop participants Enterprises rely upon strong access control and includes position statements submitted to mechanisms to ensure that corporate resources the workshop, presentations at the workshop, and (e.g., applications, networks, systems, and data) are related material. Ideas from the workshop were not exposed to anyone other than an authorized included in the Dramatically Reducing Software user. As business requirements change, enterprises Vulnerabilities report, requested of NIST by the need highly fexible access control mechanisms that White House Ofce of Science and Technology can adapt. The application of attribute based policy Policy in Spring 2016. defnitions enables enterprises to accommodate a 141 diverse set of business cases. This NCCoE practice NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017NIST INTERNAL / INTERAGENCY cybersecurity risk for manufacturers that is aligned with manufacturing-sector goals and industry REPORTS (NISTIR) best practices. This Manufacturing Profle provides a voluntary, risk-based approach for managing cybersecurity activities and reducing cyber risk NISTIR 8192 to manufacturing systems. The Manufacturing Enhancing Resilience of the Internet and Profle is meant to enhance but not replace current Communications Ecosystem: a NIST Workshop cybersecurity standards and industry guidelines Proceedings that the manufacturer is embracing. September 2017 NISTIR 8179 (DRAFT) https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/nistir/8192/ Criticality Analysis Process Model: Prioritizing fnal Systems and Components https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8192 July 2017 (public comment period: July 10 – August These proceedings document the July 11-12, 18, 2017) 2017 “Enhancing Resilience of the Internet and https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/nistir/8179/ Communications Ecosystem” workshop led by the draft National Institute of Standards and Technology. In the modern world where complex systems Executive Order 13800, “Strengthening the and systems-of-systems are integral to the Cybersecurity of Federal Networks and Critical functioning of society and businesses, it is Infrastructure” required the Secretaries of Commerce increasingly important to be able to understand and and Homeland Security to “jointly lead an open manage risks that these systems and components and transparent process to identify and promote may present to the missions that they support. action by appropriate stakeholders to improve However, in the world of fnite resources, it is not the resilience of the Internet and communications possible to apply equal protection to all assets. This ecosystem, and to encourage collaboration with the publication describes a comprehensive Criticality goal of dramatically reducing threats perpetrated by Analysis Process Model – a structured method of automated and distributed attacks (e.g., botnets).” prioritizing programs, systems, and components The workshop was designed to allow stakeholders based on their importance to the goals of an to explore a range of current and emerging organization and the impact that their inadequate solutions addressing automated, distributed threats operation or loss may present to those goals. A in an open and transparent manner. The workshop criticality analysis can help organizations identify attracted 150 participants from diverse stakeholder and better understand the systems, subsystems, communities and was conducted under Chatham components and subcomponents that are most House Rules. essential to their operations and the environment in NISTIR 8183 which they operate. That understanding facilitates Cybersecurity Framework Manufacturing Profle better decision making related to the management September 2017 of an organization’s information assets, including https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/nistir/8183/ information security risk management, project fnal management, acquisition, maintenance, and https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8183 upgrade decisions. The Model is structured to logically follow how organizations design and This document provides the NIST Cybersecurity implement projects and systems, can be used as Framework (CSF) implementation details a component of a holistic and comprehensive risk developed for the manufacturing environment. management approach that considers all risks, and The “Manufacturing Profle” of the Cybersecurity can be used with a variety of risk management Framework can be used as a roadmap for reducing standards and guidelines. 142 ITL CYBERSECURITY PUBLICATIONS | FY 2017NISTIR 8176 (DRAFT) The Software Assurance Metrics and Tool Security Assurance Challenges for Container Evaluation (SAMATE) team studied thousands of Deployment warnings from static analyzers. Tools have difculty August 2017 (public comment period: August 1-25, distinguishing between the absence of a weakness 2017) and the presence of a weakness that is buried in https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/nistir/8176/ otherwise-irrelevant code elements. This paper draft presents classes of these code elements, which we call “code complexities.” Application containers are slowly being adopted in enterprise IT infrastructures. Security guidelines These code elements have been present in and countermeasures have been proposed to software assurance testing regimens as part of the address the security concerns associated with the generation strategy for test cases when evaluating deployment of application container platforms. To static analyzers. The benefts of using code assess the efectiveness of the security solutions complexity include the development of coding implemented based on these recommendations, guidelines, boosting the diversifcation of the test it is necessary to analyze the solutions and outline cases. the security assurance requirements they must satisfy to meet their intended objectives. This is NISTIR 8151 the contribution of this document. The focus is on Dramatically Reducing Software Vulnerabilities: application containers on a Linux platform. Report to the White House Ofce of Science and Technology Policy NISTIR 8170 (DRAFT) November 2016 The Cybersecurity Framework: Implementation https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/nistir/8151/ Guidance for Federal Agencies fnal May 2017 (public comment period: May 12 – June https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8151 30, 2017) The call for a dramatic reduction in software https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/nistir/8170/ vulnerability is heard from multiple sources, recently draft from the February 2016 Federal Cybersecurity This publication assists federal agencies in Research and Development Strategic Plan. This strengthening their cybersecurity risk management plan starts by describing well-known risks; current by helping them to determine an appropriate systems perform increasingly vital tasks and are implementation of the Framework for Improving widely known to possess vulnerabilities. These Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity (known as the vulnerabilities are often not easy to discover and Cybersecurity Framework). Federal agencies can are difcult to correct. Cybersecurity has not use the Cybersecurity Framework to complement kept pace, and the pace that is needed is rapidly the existing suite of NIST security and privacy risk accelerating. The goal of this report is to present a management standards, guidelines, and practices list of specifc technical approaches that have the developed in response to the Federal Information potential to make a dramatic diference in reducing Security Management Act, as amended (FISMA). The vulnerabilities – by stopping them before they relationship between the Cybersecurity Framework occur, by fnding them before they are exploited or and the National Institute of Standards and by reducing their impact. Technology (NIST) Risk Management Framework are discussed in eight use cases. NISTIR 8139 (DRAFT) Identifying Uniformity with Entropy and NISTIR 8165 Divergence Impact of Code Complexity on Software Analysis February 2017 (public comment period: February February 2017 2 – March 9, 2017) https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/nistir/8165/ https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/nistir/8139/ fnal draft 143 https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/ir/2017/NIST. IR.8165.pdf NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017Entropy models are frequently utilized in tests document is intended to be an overview of existing identifying either the qualities of randomness or the mobile application vetting services, the features randomness uniformity of formal and/or observed these services provide and how they relate to distributions. SP 800-22 and SP 800-90 (A, B, public safety’s needs. It is also meant to aid public and C) discuss tests and methods leveraging both safety organizations when choosing which mobile Shannon and min entropies. Shannon and min application vetting services are used to evaluate entropies represent two particular cases of Renyi relevant mobile applications. entropy, which is a more general, one-parameter NISTIR 8114 entropy model. Renyi entropy insightfully unifes Report on Lightweight Cryptography Hartley, Shannon, collision, and min entropies and March 2017 belongs to the class of one parameter entropy https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/nistir/8114/ models, such as entropies named after Havrda- fnal Charvat-Daroczy, Tsallis, Abe, and Kaniadakis. Renyi https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8114 entropy, along with the other members of the one- parameter entropy models class, can be viewed The current NIST-approved cryptographic as a case of the Sharma-Mittal entropy, which is standards were designed to perform well on a bi-parametric generalized entropy model. This general-purpose computers. In recent years, NISTIR focuses on using Renyi and Tsallis entropy there has been an increased deployment of small and divergence models to analyze similarities and computing devices that have limited resources with diferences between the probability distributions which to implement cryptography. When current of interest. The report introduces extensions NIST-approved algorithms can be engineered for the traditional uniformity identifcation and to ft into the limited resources of constrained measurement techniques that were proposed in SP environments, their performance may not be 800-22 and SP 800-90. acceptable. For these reasons, NIST started a lightweight cryptography project that was tasked NISTIR 8136 with learning more about the issues and developing An Overview of Mobile Application Vetting a strategy for the standardization of lightweight Services for Public Safety cryptographic algorithms. This report provides an January 2017 overview of the lightweight cryptography project at https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/nistir/8136/ NIST, and describes plans for the standardization of fnal lightweight cryptographic algorithms. https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8136 NISTIR 8062 The Middle Class Tax Relief Act of 2012 An Introduction to Privacy Engineering and Risk mandated the creation of the frst nationwide, Management in Federal Systems high-speed communications network dedicated January 2017 for public safety. The law instantiated a new federal https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/ entity, the Federal Responder Network Authority nistir/8062/fnal (FirstNet), to build, maintain, and operate a new https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8062 Long Term Evolution (LTE) network. This network has the potential to equip frst responders with This document provides an introduction to a modern array of network devices. Mobile the concepts of privacy engineering and risk applications are an important resource that will be management for federal systems. These concepts utilized by this network. However, current mobile establish the basis for a common vocabulary to application developers may not be aware of the facilitate a better understanding and communication unique needs and requirements that must be met of privacy risks within federal systems and the for operation on FirstNet’s network. It would beneft efective implementation of privacy principles. This the public safety community to leverage the mobile publication introduces two key components to application vetting services and infrastructures support the application of privacy engineering and 144 that already exist. These services currently target risk management: privacy engineering objectives the general public and enterprise markets. This and a privacy risk model. ITL CYBERSECURITY PUBLICATIONS | FY 2017NISTIR 8011 Volume 1 unauthorized devices on a network. Unmanaged Automation Support for Security Control devices are targets that attackers can use to gain Assessments: Overview and more easily maintain a persistent platform from June 2017 which to attack the rest of the network. https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/nistir/8011/ NISTIR 7621 Revision 1 vol-1/fnal Small Business Information Security: The https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8011-1 Fundamentals This volume introduces concepts to support November 2016 the automated assessment of most of the security https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/nistir/7621/ controls in SP 800-53. Referencing SP 800-53A, the rev-1/fnal controls are divided into more granular parts (called https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.7621r1 determination statements) to be assessed. The NIST developed this interagency report as a parts of the control assessed by each determination reference guideline about cybersecurity for small statement are called control items. The control items businesses. This document is intended to present are then grouped into the appropriate security the fundamentals of a small business information capabilities. As suggested by SP 800-53 Revision security program in non-technical language. 4, security capabilities are groups of controls that support a common purpose. For efective automated assessment, testable defect checks are defned that ITL BULLETINS bridge the determination statements to the broader security capabilities to be achieved and to the SP 800-53 security control items themselves. The defect Building the Bridge Between Privacy and checks correspond to security sub-capabilities— Cybersecurity for Federal Systems called sub-capabilities because each is part of a April 2017 larger capability. Capabilities and sub-capabilities https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/itl- are both designed with the purpose of addressing bulletin/2017/04/building-bridge-b/w-privacy-- a series of attack steps. Automated assessments (in cybersecurity-for-federal-systems/fnal the form of defect checks) are performed using the This bulletin summarizes the information in test assessment method defned in SP 800-53A by NISTIR 8062, An Introduction to Privacy Engineering comparing a desired and actual state (or behavior). and Risk Management in Federal Information NISTIR 8011 Volume 2 Systems, which provides an introduction to Automation Support for Security Control the concepts of privacy engineering and risk Assessments: Hardware Asset Management management for federal information systems. June 2017 NISTIR 8062 introduces two key components to https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/nistir/8011/ support the application of privacy engineering and vol-2/fnal risk management: privacy engineering objectives https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8011-2 and a privacy risk model. The NISTIR 8011 volumes focus on each Cyber-Threat Intelligence and Information Sharing individual information security capability, adding May 2017 tangible detail to the more general overview given https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/itl- in NISTIR 8011 Volume 1, and providing a template bulletin/2017/05/cyber-threat-intelligence-and- for transition to a detailed, NIST standards- information-sharing/fnal compliant automated assessment. This document, This bulletin, based on SP 800-150, Guide Volume 2 of NISTIR 8011, addresses the Hardware to Cyber Threat Information Sharing, introduces Asset Management (HWAM) information security cyber threat intelligence and information sharing capability. The focus of the HWAM capability is to concepts, describes the benefts and challenges 145 manage the risks created by unmanaged and/or of sharing, clarifes the importance of trust, and NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017introduces specifc data handling considerations. Guide for Cybersecurity Incident Recovery It also describes how cyber threat intelligence and February 2017 information sharing can help increase the efciency https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/itl- and efectiveness of an organization’s cybersecurity bulletin/2017/02/guide-for-cybersecurity-incident- capabilities. recovery/fnal Dramatically Reducing Software Vulnerabilities This bulletin summarizes the information January 2017 presented in SP 800-184, Guide for Cybersecurity https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/itl- Event Recovery. The publication provides bulletin/2017/01/dramatically-reducing-software- organizations with strategic guidance for planning, vulnerabilities/fnal playbook developing, testing and improvements of recovery planning following a cybersecurity event. This bulletin summarized the information presented in NISTIR 8151, Dramatically Reducing Making Email Trustworthy Software Vulnerabilities: Report to the White October 2016 House Ofce of Science and Technology Policy. https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/itl- The publication starts by describing well-known bulletin/2016/10/making-email-trustworthy/fnal security risks and presents a list of specifc technical This bulletin summarizes the information approaches that have the potential to make a presented in SP 800-177, Trustworthy Email. This dramatic diference in reducing vulnerabilities. publication gives recommendations and guidelines Exploring the Next Generation of Access Control for enhancing trust in email. This guideline applies Methodologies to federal IT systems and will also be useful for any November 2016 small or medium sized organizations. https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/itl- Rethinking Security Through Systems Security bulletin/2016/11/exploring-the-next-generation-of- Engineering ac-methodologies/fnal December 2016 This bulletin summarizes the information https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/itl- presented in SP 800-178, A Comparison of Attribute bulletin/2016/12/rethinking-security-through- Based Access Control (ABAC) Standards for Data systems-security-engineering/fnal Service Applications. The publication describes This bulletin summarizes the information the Extensible Access Control Markup Language presented in SP 800-160, Systems Security (XACML) and Next Generation Access Control Engineering: Considerations for a Multidisciplinary (NGAC), and then compares them with respect to Approach in the Engineering of Trustworthy Secure fve criteria. The goal of this publication is to help Systems. The publication addresses the engineering- ABAC users and vendors make informed decisions driven perspective and actions necessary to develop when addressing future data service policy more defensible and survivable systems, inclusive enforcement requirements. of the machine, physical, and human components Fundamentals of Small Business Information that compose the systems and the capabilities and Security services delivered by those systems. March 2017 Toward Standardizing Lightweight Cryptography https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/itl- June 2017 bulletin/2017/03/fundamentals-of-small-business- https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/ information-security/fnal itl-bulletin/2017/06/toward-standardizing- This bulletin summarizes the information in lightweight-cryptography/fnal NISTIR 7621, Revision 1, Small Business Information This bulletin summarizes the information in Security: The Fundamentals. The bulletin presents NISTIR 8114, Report on Lightweight Cryptography, the fundamentals of a small business information which provides an overview of the lightweight 146 security program. ITL CYBERSECURITY PUBLICATIONS | FY 2017cryptography project at NIST and describes plans Cybersecurity for Manufacturing for the standardization of lightweight cryptography March 2017 algorithms. https://nccoe.nist.gov/projects/use-cases/ capabilities-assessment-securing-manufacturing- Understanding the Major Update to NIST SP 800- industrial-control-systems 63: Digital Identity Guidelines August 2017 Industrial Control Systems (ICS) monitor https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/itl- and control physical processes in many diferent bulletin/2017/08/update-nist-sp-800-63-digital- industries and sectors. Cyber attacks against ICS identity-guidelines/fnal devices present a real threat to organizations that employ ICS to monitor and control manufacturing This bulletin outlines the updates that NIST processes. The NIST Engineering Laboratory (EL), in recently made in its four-volume Special Publication conjunction with the National Cybersecurity Center (SP) 800-63, Digital Identity Guidelines, which of Excellence, will produce a series of example provides agencies with technical guidelines solutions demonstrating four cybersecurity regarding the digital authentication of users to capabilities for manufacturing organizations. federal networked systems. Each example solution will highlight an individual capability: Behavioral Anomaly Detection, ICS Updated NIST Guidance for Bluetooth Security Application Whitelisting, Malware Detection and July 2017 Mitigation, and ICS Data Integrity. https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/itl- bulletin/2017/07/updated-nist-guidance-for- This capabilities assessment document is bluetooth-security/fnal part one of a four-part series and addresses only behavioral anomaly detection capabilities. With This bulletin summarizes the information these capabilities in place, manufacturers may fnd it in SP 800-121 Revision 2, Guide to Bluetooth easier to detect anomalous conditions, control what Security, which provides information on the programs and applications are executed in their security capabilities of Bluetooth and provides operating environments, mitigate malware attacks, recommendations to organizations employing and ensure the integrity of critical operational Bluetooth wireless technologies on securing them data. For each of the four capabilities listed above, efectively. the NIST EL and the NCCoE will map the security Updating the Keys for DNS Security characteristics to the NIST Cybersecurity Framework September 2017 (CSF), which will provide standards-based security https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/itl- controls for manufacturers. In addition, the EL and bulletin/2017/09/updating-keys-for-dns-security/ the NCCoE will implement each of the capabilities fnal in two distinct but related lab settings: a robotics- based manufacturing enclave and a process control To help maintain the reliability and integrity enclave that resembles what is being used by of the Internet’s Domain Name System (DNS), chemical manufacturing industries. This project NIST is working with specialists from around the will result in a publicly available NIST Cybersecurity world to update the keys used by the DNS Security Practice Guide, a detailed implementation guide Extensions (DNSSEC) protocol to authenticate DNS of the practical steps needed to implement the data and avoid integrity issues such as domain cybersecurity example solution that addresses this name hijacking. challenge. Mobile Application Single Sign-On: For Public PROJECT DESCRIPTIONS (NCCOE) Safety and First Responders November 2016 https://nccoe.nist.gov/projects/use-cases/mobile- Capabilities Assessment for Securing sso 147 Manufacturing Industrial Control Systems: NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017Mobile platforms ofer a signifcant operational refect local routing policies and preferences to advantage to public safety stakeholders by giving destinations, the lack of built-in security allows them access to mission critical information and the protocol to be exploited. As a result, attacks services while deployed in the feld, during training against Internet routing functions are a signifcant and exercises, or participating in day-to-day and systemic threat to Internet-based information business and preparations during non-emergency systems. The consequences of these attacks can: (1) periods. However, these advantages can be deny access to Internet services; (2) detour Internet limited if unnecessary or complex authentication trafc to permit eavesdropping and to facilitate on- requirements stand in the way of an ofcial path attacks on endpoints (sites); (3) misdeliver providing emergency services, especially when any Internet network trafc to malicious endpoints; delay – even seconds – is a matter of containing (4) undermine IP address-based reputation and or exacerbating an emergency situation. The vast fltering systems; and (5) cause routing instability in diversity of public safety personnel, missions, and the Internet. operational environments magnifes the need for a To improve the security of inter-domain routing nimble authentication solution for public safety. trafc exchange, NIST has begun the development of This project will explore various multifactor a Special Publication (SP 800-189 – in preparation) authenticators currently in use by the public safety that provides security recommendations for community, or those potentially ofered in the future the use of inter-domain protocols and routing as their next generation networks are brought technologies. These recommendations aim to online. The efort will not only build an interoperable protect the integrity of Internet trafc exchange. solution that can accept various authenticators to Implementing BGP Route Origin Validation (ROV) speed access to online systems while maintaining an based upon the Resource Public Key Infrastructure appropriate amount of security, but will also focus on (RPKI) can mitigate accidental and malicious delivering single sign-on (SSO) capabilities to both attacks associated with route hijacking. The NCCoE native and web/browser-based applications. It is not understands that organizations and individuals enough to have an authenticator that is easy to use; have Internet performance expectations and this project sets out to identify technical options for requirements to protect against malicious cyber the public safety community to consider deploying attacks. It is expected that eventual wide-scale to ensure that individuals in the feld are not kept deployment of RPKI-based ROV will signifcantly from meeting their mission goals by unnecessary enhance the overall security and robustness of authentication prompts. This project will result in a the Internet. This project will result in a NIST freely available NIST Cybersecurity Practice Guide, Cybersecurity Practice Guide—a publicly available detailing the technical decisions, trade-ofs, lessons description of the solution and practical steps learned, and implementation instructions based on needed to implement practices that efectively market-dominant standards, such that public safety demonstrate the security and functionality of all organizations can accelerate the deployment of a components of ROV. range of mobile authentication and SSO services to Securing Property Management Systems: their population of users. Cybersecurity for the Hospitality Sector (DRAFT) Secure Inter-Domain Routing—Part 1: Route Hijacks April 28, 2017 July 6, 2017 https://nccoe.nist.gov/projects/use_cases/ https://nccoe.nist.gov/projects/building-blocks/ securing-property-management-systems secure-inter-domain-routing Hospitality organizations rely on Property Since the creation of the Internet, the Border Management Systems (PMS) for daily tasks, Gateway Protocol (BGP) has been the default planning, and record keeping. As the operations routing protocol to route trafc among organizations hub, the PMS interfaces with several services and (Internet Service Providers (ISPs) and Autonomous components within a hotel’s IT system, such as Point- Systems (ASes)). While the BGP protocol performs of-Sale (POS) systems, door locks, Wi-Fi networks, 148 adequately in identifying viable paths that and other guest service applications. Adding to ITL CYBERSECURITY PUBLICATIONS | FY 2017the complexity of connections, external business cybersecurity risk based on your organization’s partners’ components and services are also typically mission, needs, and objectives. The Baldrige connected to the PMS, such as on-premise spas Cybersecurity Excellence Builder combines or restaurants, online travel agents, and customer concepts in the Framework for Improving Critical relationship management partners or applications Infrastructure Cybersecurity (Cybersecurity (on-premise or cloud-based). The numerous Framework) and the Baldrige Excellence connections to, and users of the PMS, could provide Framework. Like those two sources, it is not a one- a broader surface for attack by malicious actors. The size-fts-all approach. It is adaptable and scalable draft describes methods to improve the security of to your organization’s needs, goals, capabilities, the PMS, and how these methods can help protect and environment. It does not prescribe how you the business from network intrusions that might should structure your organization’s cybersecurity lead to data breaches and fraud. policies and operations. Through interrelated sets of open-ended questions, it encourages you to use the Based on industry research and in collaboration approaches that best ft your organization. Using with hospitality industry stakeholders, the NCCoE this self-assessment, you can: is starting a project that aims to help hospitality organizations implement stronger security measures • Determine cybersecurity-related activities that within and around the PMS, with a focus on the are important to your business strategy and POS system through network segmentation, point- critical service delivery; to-point encryption, data tokenization, multifactor • Prioritize your investments in managing authentication for remote and partner access, network cybersecurity risk; and user behavior analytics, and business-only usage restrictions. In collaboration with the hospitality • Determine how best to enable your business community and technology vendors who workforce, customers, suppliers, partners, and implement standards that improve cybersecurity, the collaborators to be risk conscious and security NCCoE will explore methods to strengthen the security aware, and to fulfll their cybersecurity roles of the PMS and its connections and will develop an and responsibilities; example implementation composed of open-source and commercially available components. This project • Assess the efectiveness and efciency of your will produce a NIST Cybersecurity Practice Guide—a use of cybersecurity standards, guidelines, freely available description of the solution and and practices; practical steps needed to efectively secure the PMS • Assess the cybersecurity results you achieve; and its many connections within the hotel IT system. and • Identify strengths to leverage and priorities for OTHER NIST PUBLICATIONS improvement. Framework for Improving Critical Infrastructure Baldrige Cybersecurity Excellence Builder: Key Cybersecurity, Version 1.1 (DRAFT) questions for improving your organization’s January 10, 2017 cybersecurity performance, v1.0 https://www.nist.gov/fle/344211 April 2017 https://www.nist.gov/baldrige/products-services/ The national and economic security of the baldrige-cybersecurity-initiative United States depends on the reliable functioning of its critical infrastructure. Cybersecurity threats The Baldrige Cybersecurity Excellence Builder take advantage of the increased complexity and is a voluntary self-assessment tool that enables connectivity of critical infrastructure systems, organizations to better understand the efectiveness placing the nation’s security at risk. To better protect of their cybersecurity risk management eforts. these systems, the President issued Executive It helps your organization identify strengths and 149 Order 13636, Improving Critical Infrastructure opportunities for improvement in managing NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017Cybersecurity, on February 12, 2013. The Executive EXTERNAL PUBLICATIONS Order established that “[i]t is the Policy of the United States to enhance the security and resilience The following journal articles and conference of the nation’s critical infrastructure and to maintain papers were published during FY 2017. For conference a cyber environment that encourages efciency, papers, the contributions listed below were either i) innovation, and economic prosperity while accepted for a conference held during FY 2017, or promoting safety, security, business confdentiality, ii) accepted for a conference held prior to FY 2017 privacy, and civil liberties.” In enacting this policy, with fnal proceedings published in FY 2017 (and not the Executive Order calls for the development of listed in an earlier Annual Report). All NIST authors a voluntary risk-based Cybersecurity Framework are identifed using italics; publications are arranged - a set of industry standards and best practices alphabetically by author. to help organizations manage cybersecurity risks. The resulting Framework, created through Links to document preprints are available at collaboration between government and the private https://csrc.nist.gov/publications. sector, uses a common language to address and manage cybersecurity risk in a cost-efective way, based on business needs without placing additional WHITE PAPERS regulatory requirements on businesses. The Framework enables organizations—regardless of J. Alperin-Sherif and D. Apon. Tightly Secure size, degree of cybersecurity risk, or cybersecurity Short Signatures from Weak PRFs. Cryptology ePrint sophistication—to apply the principles and the best Archive, Report 2017/563, June 7, 2017, 26 pp. risk management practices to improve the security and resilience of the critical infrastructure. The http://ia.cr/2017/563 Framework provides organization and structure to today’s multiple approaches to cybersecurity by The Boyen-Li signature scheme [Asiacrypt’16] assembling standards, guidelines, and practices that is a major theoretical breakthrough. Via a clever are working efectively in industry today. Moreover, homomorphic evaluation of a pseudorandom because it references globally recognized standards function over their verifcation key, they achieve for cybersecurity, the Framework can also be a reduction loss in security that is linear in the used by organizations located outside the United underlying security parameter and entirely States and can serve as a model for international independent of the number of message queries cooperation on strengthening critical infrastructure made, while still maintaining short signatures cybersecurity. (consisting of a single short lattice vector). All previous schemes with such an independent Profles for the Lightweight Cryptography reduction loss in security required a linear number Standardization Process (DRAFT) of such lattice vectors, and even in the classical April 2017 world, the only schemes achieving short signatures https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/white- relied on non-standard assumptions. paper/2017/04/26/profles-for-lightweight- cryptography-standardization-process/draft We improve on their result, providing a verifcation key that is smaller by a linear factor, a This document describes the frst two profles signifcantly tighter reduction with only a constant for NIST’s lightweight cryptography project. Profle loss, and signing and verifcation algorithms that I provides authenticated encryption with associated could plausibly run in about 1 second. Our main idea data (AEAD) and hashing functionalities for both is to change the scheme in a manner that allows us hardware-oriented and software-oriented constrained to replace the pseudorandom function evaluation environments. Profle II provides only AEAD in with an evaluation of a much more efcient weak hardware-oriented constrained environments. pseudorandom function. As a matter of independent interest, we give 150 ITL CYBERSECURITY PUBLICATIONS | FY 2017an improved method of the randomized inversion uncertainties, and strategies that the standardization of the G gadget matrix, which reduces the noise of post-quantum cryptography will entail. growth rate in homomorphic evaluations performed J.Chung, M. Iorga, J. Voas and S. Lee. Alexa, Can in a large number of lattice-based cryptographic I Trust You? Computer (IEEE Computer) 50(9), pp. schemes, without incurring the high cost of sampling 100-104 (September 2017). discrete Gaussian functions. https://doi.org/10.1109/MC.2017.3571053 S. Breiner, J. Ross, and C. Miller. Graphical Methods in Device-Independent Quantum Cryptography. Several recent incidents highlight signifcant arXiv.org, Report 1705.09213, May 25, 2017, 15 pp. security and privacy risks associated with intelligent virtual assistants (IVAs). Better diagnostic testing of https://arxiv.org/abs/1705.09213 IVA ecosystems can reveal such vulnerabilities and We introduce a framework for graphical lead to more trustworthy systems. security proofs in device-independent quantum A.A. Ciss and D. Moody. Geometric Progressions cryptography using the methods of categorical on Elliptic Curves. Glasnik Matematicki 52(1), pp. 1-10 quantum mechanics. We are optimistic that this (2017). approach will make some of the highly complex proofs in quantum cryptography more accessible, https://web.math.pmf.unizg.hr/glasnik/vol_52/ facilitate the discovery of new proofs, and enable no1_01.html automated proof verifcation. As an example of our framework, we reprove a recent result from device- In this paper, we look at long geometric independent quantum cryptography: any linear progressions on diferent models of elliptic curves, randomness expansion protocol can be converted namely Weierstrass curves, Edwards and twisted into an unbounded randomness expansion protocol. Edwards curves, Huf curves and general quartics We give a graphical exposition of a proof of this curves. By a geometric progression on an elliptic result and implement parts of it in the Globular curve, we mean the existence of rational points on proof assistant. the curve whose x-coordinates (or y-coordinates) are in geometric progression. We fnd infnite families of twisted Edwards curves and Huf JOURNAL ARTICLES curves with geometric progressions of length 5, an infnite family of Weierstrass curves with 8-term progressions, as well as infnite families of quartic P.Black, I. Bojanova. Defeating Bufer Overfow: curves containing 10-term geometric progressions. A Trivial but Dangerous Bug. IT Professional 18(6), pp. 58-61 (November/December 2016). F. Izadi, F. Khoshnam and D. Moody. Heron Quadrilaterals via Elliptic Curves. Rocky Mountain https://doi.org/10.1109/MITP.2016.117 Journal of Mathematics 47(4), pp. 1227-1258 (2017). With the C programming language comes bufer https://doi.org/10.1216/RMJ-2017-47-4-1227 overfows. Because it is unlikely that the use of C will stop any time soon, the authors present some ways A Heron quadrilateral is a cyclic quadrilateral to deal with bufer overfows—both how to detect whose area and side lengths are rational. In this and how to prevent them. work, we establish a correspondence between Heron quadrilaterals and a family of elliptic curves L. Chen. Cryptography Standards in Quantum of the form y2 = x3 + ax2 − n2x. This correspondence Time: New Wine in an Old Wineskin? IEEE Security & generalizes the notions of Goins and Maddox who Privacy 15(4), pp. 51-57 (July/August 2017). established a similar connection between Heron https://doi.org/10.1109/MSP.2017.3151339 triangles and elliptic curves. We further study this family of elliptic curves, looking at their torsion 151 The history of cryptography standards is groups and ranks. We also explore their connection reviewed, with a view to planning for the challenges, with the a=0 case of congruent numbers. Congruent NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017numbers are positive integers equal to the area of a https://doi.org/10.1109/MS.2016.136 right triangle with rational side lengths. As new and exciting healthcare applications F. Khoshnam and D. Moody. High Rank Elliptic arise that use smart technologies, the Internet of Curves with Torsion �/4� Induced by Kihara’s Things, data analytics, and other technologies, Elliptic Curves. INTEGERS: The electronic journal of a critical problem is emerging: the potential loss combinatorial number theory 16, article no. A70, pp. of caring. Although these exciting technologies 1-12 (October 5, 2016). have improved patient care by allowing for better assessment, surveillance, and treatment, their use http://math.colgate.edu/~integers/vol16.html can disassociate the caregiver from the patient, essentially removing the “care” from healthcare. So, Working over the feld �(t), Kihara constructed you can view caring as an undiscovered -ility that an elliptic curve with torsion group �/4� and fve ranks at least as important as other well-known independent rational points, showing that the rank -ilities in healthcare systems. is at least fve. Following his approach, we give a new infnite family of elliptic curves with torsion P. Laplante, M. Kassab, N. Laplante and J. Voas. group �/4� and rank at least fve. This matches the Building Caring Healthcare Systems in the Internet current record for such curves. In addition, we give of Things. IEEE Systems Journal 99, pp. 1-8 (February specifc examples of these curves with ranks 10 and 11. 22, 2017). D.R. Kuhn, R.N. Kacker and Y. Lei. Measuring and https://doi.org/10.1109/JSYST.2017.2662602 Specifying Combinatorial Coverage of Test Input Confgurations. Innovations in Systems and Software The nature of healthcare and the computational Engineering 12(4), pp. 249-261 (December 2016). and physical technologies and constraints present a number of challenges to systems designers and https://doi.org/10.1007/s11334-015-0266-2 implementers. In spite of the challenges, there is a signifcant market for systems and products to A key issue in testing is how many tests are support caregivers in their tasks as the number of needed for a required level of coverage or fault people needing assistance grows substantially. In detection. Estimates are often based on error rates this paper, we present a structured approach for in initial testing, or on code coverage. For example, describing the Internet of Things (IoT) for healthcare tests may be run until a desired level of statement systems. We illustrate the approach for three use or branch coverage is achieved. Combinatorial cases and discuss relevant quality issues that arise methods present an opportunity for a diferent - in particular, the need to consider caring as a approach to estimating the required test-set size requirement. using characteristics of the test set. This paper describes methods for estimating the coverage of, P.Mell, J. Shook, R. Harang and S. Gavrila. Linear and ability to detect, t-way interaction faults of a Time Algorithms to Restrict Insider Access using test set, based on a covering array. We also develop Multi-Policy Access Control Systems. Journal of a connection between (static) combinatorial Wireless Mobile Networks, Ubiquitous Computing, coverage and (dynamic) code coverage, such that and Dependable Applications 8(1), pp. 4-25 (March if a specifc condition is satisfed, 100 % branch 2017). coverage is assured. Using these results, we propose practical recommendations for using combinatorial https://doi.org/10.22667/JOWUA.2017.03.31.004 coverage in specifying test requirements, and for An important way to limit malicious insiders improving estimates of the fault detection capacity from distributing sensitive information is to restrict of a test set. access as tightly as possible. This has always been N. Laplante, P. Laplante and J. Voas. Caring: An the goal in the design of access control mechanisms, Undiscovered Super “Ility” of Smart Healthcare. but individual approaches can be inadequate. IEEE Software 33(6), pp. 16-19 (November/December Approaches that instantiate multiple methods 152 2016). simultaneously have been shown to restrict access ITL CYBERSECURITY PUBLICATIONS | FY 2017with more precision. However, those approaches when randomness is certifed from nonlocal games have had limited scalability (resulting in exponential with quantum strategies. This is in contrast to non- calculations in some cases). signaling game strategies, which may produce global randomness without any local randomness. In this work, we provide an implementation of the We discuss potential implications for cryptographic Next Generation Access Control (NGAC) standard protocols between mistrustful parties. from the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) and demonstrate that it scales. The existing D.Moody and A.A. Ciss. Arithmetic Progressions publicly available reference implementations all on Conics. Journal of Integer Sequences 20(1), article use cubic algorithms for policy decisions, and no. 17.2.6, pp. 1-8 (December 27, 2016). thus, NGAC was widely viewed as not scalable. https://cs.uwaterloo.ca/journals/JIS/VOL20/Moody/ Our approach provides an easy to understand moody7.html graph algorithm that performs policy decisions in linear time at the worst. However, in practice, the In this paper, we look at long arithmetic algorithm runs considerably faster. We also provide progressions on conics. By an arithmetic progression a default linear-time mechanism to visualize and on a curve, we mean the existence of rational points review user access rights for an ensemble of access on the curve whose x-coordinates are in arithmetic control mechanisms. Our visualization appears to progression. We revisit arithmetic progressions on be a simple fle directory hierarchy, but in reality is the unit circle, constructing 3-term progressions of an automatically generated structure abstracted points in the frst quadrant containing an arbitrary from the underlying access control graph that rational point on the unit circle. We also provide works with any set of simultaneously instantiated infnite families of 3-term progressions on the unit access control policies. It also provides an implicit hyperbola, as well as conicsax2 + cy2 = 1 containing mechanism for symbolic linking that provides a arithmetic progressions as long as 8 terms. powerful access capability. Our work has thus lead to the frst efcient implementation of NGAC while D. Simos, D.R. Kuhn, A. Voyiatzis and R.N. enabling user privilege review through a novel Kacker. Combinatorial Methods in Security Testing. visualization approach. Computer (IEEE) 49(10), pp. 80-83 (October 2016). C. Miller and Y. Shi. Randomness in Nonlocal https://doi.org/10.1109/MC.2016.314 Games Between Mistrustful Players. Quantum Combinatorial methods can make software Information & Computation 17(7&8), pp. 595-610 security testing much more efcient and efective (June 2017). than conventional approaches. https://doi.org/10.26421/QIC17.7-8 J. Torres-Jimenez, I. Izquierdo-Marquez, D. If two quantum players at a nonlocal game Ramirez-Acuna and R. Peralta. Near-Optimal $G$ achieve a superclassical score, then their Algorithm to Count Occurrences of Subsequences measurement outcomes must be at least partially of a Given Length. Discrete Mathematics, Algorithms random from the perspective of any third player. and Applications 9(3), 10 pp. (June 2017). This is the basis for device-independent quantum https://doi.org/10.1142/S1793830917500422 cryptography. In this paper we address a related question: does a superclassical score at $G$ For k � �+, defne Σ as the set of integers k guarantee that one player has created randomness {0,1,…, k–1}. Given an integer n and a string t of from the perspective of the other player? We show length m ≥ n over Σ , we count the number of times k that for complete-support games, the answer is that each one of the kn distinct strings of length n yes; even if the second player is given the frst over Σ occurs as a subsequence of t. Our algorithm k player’s input at the conclusion of the game, he makes only one scan of t and solves the problem in cannot perfectly recover her output. Thus, some time complexity mkn-1 and space complexity m+kn. amount of local randomness (i.e., randomness 153 These are very close to best possible results. possessed by only one player) is always obtained NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017J. Voas and D.R. Kuhn. What Happened to modeling for cloud data centers. In this paper, we Software Metrics? Computer (IEEE Computer)50(5), conduct comprehensive threat modeling exercises pp. 88-98 (May 2017). based on two representative cloud infrastructures using several popular threat modeling methods, https://doi.org/10.1109/MC.2017.144 including attack surface, attack trees, attack graphs, and security metrics based on attack trees and attack In the 1980’s, the software quality community graphs, respectively. Those threat modeling eforts was all “a buzz” with seemingly endless “potential” provide cloud providers with practical lessons and approaches for producing higher quality software. the means toward better evaluating, understanding, At the forefront of that was software metrics, along and improving their cloud infrastructures. Our with the corresponding software testing techniques results may also improve confdence in potential and tools and process improvement schemes that cloud tenants by providing them a clearer picture relied on the software metrics. We asked a panel about potential threats in cloud infrastructures and of 7 software metrics experts 11 questions to help corresponding solutions. explain the last 40 years of software measurement and where they believe we stand today. Our D. Borbor, L. Wang, S. Jajodia and A. Singhal. experts are: (1) Taghi Khoshgoftaar (Florida Atlantic Securing Networks Against Unpatchable and University), (2) Edward F. Miller (Software Research, Unknown Vulnerabilities Using Heterogeneous Inc.), (3) Vic Basili (University of Maryland, retired), Hardening Options. 31st IFIP Annual Conference on (4) Jim Bieman (Colorado State University), Data and Applications Security and Privacy (DBSEC (5) Ram Chillarege (Chillarege, Inc.), (6) Adam 2017), Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, July 19-21, 2017. Porter (Fraunhofer Institute), and (7) Alain Abran In Lecture Notes in Computer Science 10359, DBSec (University of Québec). We did not ask rhetorical 2017: Data and Applications Security and Privacy XXXI, questions, but rather questions that we believe pp. 509-528. remain unanswered, and if answered, could form a foundation for improved or new software metrics https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-61176-1_28 and software measurement. The administrators of a mission critical network usually have to worry about non- CONFERENCE PAPERS traditional threats, e.g., how to live with known, but unpatchable vulnerabilities, and how to improve the network’s resilience against potentially unknown N. Alhebaishi, L. Wang, S. Jajodia and A. vulnerabilities. To this end, network hardening is a Singhal. Threat Modeling for Cloud Data Center well-known preventive security solution that aims Infrastructures. 9th International Symposium on to improve network security by taking proactive Foundations and Practice of Security (FPS 2016), actions, namely, hardening options. However, Québec City, Québec, Canada, October 24-26, 2016. In most existing network hardening approaches rely Lecture Notes in Computer Science 10128, Foundations on a single hardening option, such as disabling and Practice of Security (Revised Selected Papers), unnecessary services, which becomes less efective pp. 302-319. when it comes to dealing with unknown and unpatchable vulnerabilities. A heterogeneous https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-51966-1_20 approach is lacking that can combine diferent Cloud computing has undergone rapid hardening options in an optimal way to deal with expansion throughout the last decade. Many both unknown and unpatchable vulnerabilities. companies and organizations have made the In this paper, we propose such an approach by transition from traditional data centers to the unifying multiple hardening options, such as cloud due to its fexibility and lower cost. However, frewall rule modifcation, disabling services, service traditional data centers are still being relied upon diversifcation, and access control, under the same by those who are less certain about the security of model. We then apply security metrics designed cloud computing. This problem is highlighted by the for evaluating network resilience against unknown 154 fact that there only exist limited eforts on threat and unpatchable vulnerabilities, and consequently ITL CYBERSECURITY PUBLICATIONS | FY 2017derive optimal hardening solutions that maximize dimension. This improves the 3n-o(n) bound of security under given cost constraints. Norbert Blum (1984). The proof is based on the gate elimination technique extended with the following D. Ferraiolo, S. Gavrila, G. Katwala and J. Roberts. three ideas. We generalize the computational model Imposing Fine-grain Next Generation Access Control by allowing circuits to contain cycles; this in turn over Database Queries. Proceedings of the 2nd ACM allows us to perform afne substitutions. We use a Workshop on Attribute Based Access Control (ABAC carefully chosen circuit complexity measure to track ‘17), Scottsdale, Arizona, March 24, 2017, pp. 9-15. the progress of the gate elimination process. Finally, we use quadratic substitutions that may be viewed https://doi.org/10.1145/3041048.3041050 as delayed afne substitutions. In this paper, we describe a system that leverages Y. Hanatani, N. Ogura, Y. Ohba, L. Chen and S. the ANSI/INCITS Next Generation Access Control Das. Secure Multicast Group Management and (NGAC) standard, called Next-generation Database Key Distribution in IEEE 802.21. 3rd International Access Control (NDAC), for accessing data in tables, Conference on Research in Security Standardisation rows, and columns in existing Relational Database (SSR 2016), Gaithersburg, Maryland, December 5-6, Management System (RDBMS) products. NDAC 2016. In Lecture Notes in Computer Science 10074, imposes access control at the data level, eliminating Security Standardisation Research. SSR 2016, pp. 227- the need for implementing and managing access 243. control in applications and/or through the use of proprietary RDBMS mechanisms. Consequently, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-49100-4_10 the same policies can protect multiple databases from queries sent from multiple applications. Controlling a large number of devices such as Furthermore, NDAC not only provides control down sensors and smart end points is always a challenge to the feld level, but to varying felds of select rows. where scalability and security are indispensable. NDAC is unique in achieving this granularity of This is even more important when it comes to control without the use and coordination of multiple periodic confguration updates to a large number protection mechanisms. Operationally, users issue of such devices belonging to one or more groups. wide sweeping queries, and NDAC allows access One solution could be to take a group of devices to the optimal amount of data permissible for the as a unit of control and then manage them through user. The method includes an Access Manager for a group communication mechanism. An obvious trapping and enforcing policy over the SQL queries challenge to this approach is how to create such issued by applications, as well as a Translator for groups dynamically and manage them securely. converting SQL statements to NGAC inputs and Moreover, there need to be mechanisms in place by converting NGAC authorization responses to either which members of the group can be removed and an access deny or one or more permitted SQL added dynamically. statements. In this paper, we propose a technique that has M. Find, A. Golovnev, E.A. Hirsch and A.S. Kulikov. been recently standardized in IEEE 802.21 (IEEE Std A Better-Than-3n Lower Bound for the Circuit 802.21d™-2015) with the objective of providing a Complexity of an Explicit Function. Proceedings. standard-based solution to the above challenges. 57th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of The approach relies on the Logical Key Hierarchy Computer Science (FOCS 2016), New Brunswick, New (LKH) based key distribution mechanism, but Jersey, October 9-11, 2016, pp. 89-98. optimizes the number of encryption and decryption operations by using a “Complete Subtree”. It https://doi.org/10.1109/FOCS.2016.19 leverages the IEEE 802.21 framework, services, and protocol for communication and management, and We consider Boolean circuits over the full binary provides a scalable and secure way to manage (e.g., basis. We prove a (3+1/86)n-o(n) lower bound on add and remove) devices from one or more groups. the size of such a circuit for an explicitly defned We describe the group key distribution protocol 155 predicate, namely an afne disperser for sublinear NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017in detail and provide a security analysis of the Registry entries, or log fle entries, while our scheme along with some performance results from approach requires no intact artifact recovery and a prototype implementation. leverages trace evidence in the form of residual partial fles. In the case of recently uninstalled R. Harang and P. Mell. Micro-Signatures: The applications or an instrumented infrastructure, Efectiveness of Known Bad N-Grams for Network artifacts and traces may be intact and complete. Anomaly Detection. 9th International Symposium on In most cases, however, digital artifacts and traces Foundations and Practice of Security, Québec City, are altered, destroyed, and disassociated over time, Québec, Canada, October 24-26, 2016. In Lecture due to normal system operation and deliberate Notes in Computer Science 10128, Foundations and obfuscation activity. As a result, analysts are often Practice of Security (Revised Selected Papers), pp. presented with partial and incomplete artifacts and 36-47. traces from which defensible conclusions must be drawn. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-51966-1_3 In this work, we match the sectors from a hard Network intrusion detection is broadly divided disk of interest to a previously constructed catalog into signature and anomaly detection. The former of full fles captured while various applications identifes patterns associated with known attacks, were installed, used, and uninstalled. The sectors and the latter attempts to learn a “normal” pattern composing the fles in the catalog are not necessarily of activity and provides an alert when behaviors unique to each fle or application, so we use an outside of those norms is detected. The n-gram inverse frequency-weighting scheme to compute methodology has arguably been the most successful the inferential value of matched sectors. Similarly, technique for network anomaly detection. In this we compute the fraction of full fles associated work, we discovered that when training data is with each application that is matched, where each sanitized, n-gram anomaly detection is not primarily fle with a sector match is weighted by the fraction anomaly detection, as it receives the majority of of total catalog sectors matched for that fle. We its performance from an implicit non-anomaly compared results using both the sector-weighted subsystem that neither uses typical signatures nor is and fle-weighted values for known ground truth- anomaly-based (though it is closely related to both). test images and fnal-snapshot images from the We fnd that for our data, these “micro-signatures” M57 Patents Scenario data set. The fle-weighted provide the vast majority of the detection capability. measure was slightly more accurate than the This fnding changes how we understand and sector-weighted measure, although both identifed approach n-gram based ‘anomaly’ detection. By all of the uninstalled applications in the test images understanding the foundational principles upon and a high percentage of installed and uninstalled which it operates, we can then better explore how applications in the M57 data set, with minimal false to optimally improve it. positives for both sets. J. Jones, T. Khan, K. Laskey, A. Nelson, M. Laamanen The key contribution of our work is the and D. White. Inferring Previously Uninstalled suggestion of uninstalled applications through Applications from Digital Traces. Proceedings of the weighted measurement of residual fle fragments. 11th Annual Conference on Digital Forensics, Security Our experimental results indicate that past and Law (ADFSL), Daytona Beach, Florida, May 24-26, application activity can be reliably indicated even 2017, pp. 113-130. after an application has been uninstalled, and the http://commons.erau.edu/adfsl/2016/wednesday/3/ host system has been rebooted and used. The rapid and reliable indication of previously uninstalled In this paper, we present an approach and applications is useful for cyber defense, law experimental results to suggest the past presence enforcement, and intelligence operations. of an application after the application has been uninstalled and the system has remained in use. L. Khati, N. Mouha and D. Vergnaud. Full Disk Current techniques rely on the recovery of intact Encryption: Bridging Theory and Practice. RSA 156 artifacts and traces, e.g., whole fles, Windows Conference 2017, San Francisco, California, February ITL CYBERSECURITY PUBLICATIONS | FY 201714-17, 2017. In Lecture Notes in Computer Science International Conference on Digital Forensics, Orlando, 10159, Topics in Cryptology – CT-RSA 2017, pp. 241-257. Florida, January 30 – February 1, 2017. In IFIP Advances in Information and Communication Technology 511, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-52153-4_14 Advances in Digital Forensics XIII, Revised Selected Papers, pp. 111-130. We revisit the problem of Full Disk Encryption (FDE), which refers to the encryption of each sector https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-67208-3_7 of a disk volume. In the context of FDE, it is assumed that there is no space to store additional data, such Cloud computing provides benefts such as as an IV (Initialization Vector) or a MAC (Message increased fexibility, scalability and cost savings Authentication Code) value. We formally defne to enterprises. However, it introduces several the security notions in this model against chosen- challenges to digital forensic investigations. Current plaintext and chosen-ciphertext attacks. Then, we forensic analysis frameworks and tools are largely classify various FDE modes of operation according intended for ofine investigations, and it is assumed to their security in this setting, in the presence of that the logs are under investigator control. In cloud various restrictions on the queries of the adversary. computing, however, evidence can be distributed We found that our approach leads to new insights across several machines, most of which would for both theory and practice. Moreover, we be outside the control of the investigator. Other introduce the notion of a diversifer, which does not challenges include the dependence of forensically require additional storage, but allows the plaintext valuable data on the cloud deployment model, large of a particular sector to be encrypted to diferent volumes of data, proprietary data formats, multiple ciphertexts. We show how a 2-bit diversifer can isolated virtual machine instances running on a be implemented in the EagleTree simulator for single physical machine and inadequate tools for solid state drives (SSDs), while decreasing the total conducting cloud forensic investigations. number of Input/Output Operations Per Second This research demonstrates that evidence from (IOPS) by only 4 %. multiple sources can be used to reconstruct cloud D.R. Kuhn, M. Raunak and R.N. Kacker. An Analysis attack scenarios. The sources include: (i) intrusion of Vulnerability Trends, 2008-2016. Proceedings. detection system and application software logs; (ii) 2017 IEEE International Conference on Software cloud service API calls; and (iii) system calls from Quality, Reliability and Security (Companion Volume) virtual machines. A forensic analysis framework for (QRS-C 2017), Prague, Czech Republic, July 25-29, cloud computing environments is presented that 2017, pp. 587-588. considers logged data related to activities in the application layer as well as lower layers. A Prolog- https://doi.org/10.1109/QRS-C.2017.106 based forensic analysis tool is used to automate the correlation of evidence from clients and the Computer security has been a subject of serious cloud service provider in order to reconstruct attack study for at least 40 years, and a steady stream scenarios in a forensic investigation. of innovations has improved our ability to protect networks and applications. But attackers have P.Mell, S. Gavrila and J. Shook. Restricting Insider adapted and changed methods over the years Access through Efcient Implementation of Multi- as well. Where do we stand today in the battle Policy Access Control Systems. MIST ‘16: Proceedings between attackers and defenders? Are attackers of the 8th ACM CCS International Workshop on gaining ground, as it often seems when reading Managing Insider Security Threats, Vienna, Austria, press accounts of the latest data exposure? This October 24-28, 2016, pp. 13-22. analysis seeks to answer these questions using data from the U.S. National Vulnerability Database https://doi.org/10.1145/2995959.2995961 (NVD), and to identify classes of vulnerabilities The American National Standards Organization where improvements will be most cost efective. has standardized an access control approach, Next 157 C. Liu, A. Singhal and D. Wijesekera. Identifying Generation Access Control (NGAC), that enables Evidence for Cloud Forensic Analysis. IFIP WG 11.3 the simultaneous instantiation of multiple access NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017control policies. For large complex enterprises, another host). To address this, we represent known this is critical to limiting the legally authorized weaknesses and vulnerabilities as a type of colored access by insiders. However, the specifcations attack graph. We measure depth and width through describe the required access control capabilities solving the shortest color path and minimum color but not the related algorithms. Existing reference cut problems. We prove both of these to be NP- implementations have inefcient algorithms and Hard and thus, for our solution, we provide a suite thus, do not fully express the NGAC’s ability to scale. of greedy heuristics. We then empirically apply our approach to large randomly generated networks as For example, the primary NGAC reference well as to ICS networks generated from a published implementation took several minutes to simply ICS attack template. Lastly, we discuss how to display the set of fles accessible to a user on a use these results to help guide improvements to moderately sized system. To solve this problem, we defense-in-depth postures. provide efcient algorithms, reducing the overall complexity from cubic to quadratic. Our other major D. Moody, R. Perlner and D. Smith-Tone. contribution is to provide a novel mechanism for Improved Attacks for Characteristic-2 Parameters administrators and users to review allowed access of the Cubic ABC Simple Matrix Encryption rights. We provide an interface that appears to be Scheme. 8th International Workshop on Post- a simple fle directory hierarchy but in reality is an Quantum Cryptography (PQCrypto 2017), Utrecht, automatically generated structure abstracted from The Netherlands, June 26-28, 2017. In Lecture the underlying access control graph that works Notes in Computer Science 10346, Post-Quantum with any set of simultaneously instantiated access Cryptography - PQCrypto 2017, pp. 255-271. control policies. Our work thus provides the frst https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-59879-6_15 efcient implementation of NGAC while enabling user privilege review through a novel visualization In the last few years multivariate public key approach. It thereby enables the efcient cryptography has experienced an infusion of new simultaneous instantiation of multiple access control ideas for encryption. Among these new strategies is policies that is needed to best limit insider access to the ABC Simple Matrix family of encryption schemes information (and thereby limit information leakage). that utilize the structure of a large matrix algebra to construct efectively invertible systems of nonlinear P. Mell, J. Shook and R. Harang. Measuring and equations hidden by an isomorphism of polynomials. Improving the Efectiveness of Defense-in-Depth One promising approach to cryptanalyzing these Postures. Proceedings of the 2nd Annual Industrial schemes has been structural cryptanalysis, based Control System Security Workshop (ICSS ‘16), Los on applying a strategy similar to MinRank attacks to Angeles, California, December 6, 2016, pp. 15-22. the discrete diferential. These attacks however have https://doi.org/10.1145/3018981.3018986 been signifcantly more expensive when applied to parameters using felds of characteristic 2, which Defense-in-depth is an important security have been the most common choice for published architecture principle that has signifcant application parameters. This disparity is especially great for to industrial control systems (ICS), cloud services, the cubic version of the Simple Matrix Encryption storehouses of sensitive data, and many other areas. Scheme. We claim that an ideal defense-in-depth posture is “deep,” containing many layers of security, and In this work, we demonstrate a technique that “narrow,” the number of node independent attack can be used to implement a structural attack that paths is minimized. Unfortunately, accurately is as efcient against parameters of characteristic 2 calculating both depth and width is difcult using as are attacks against analogous parameters over standard graph algorithms because of a lack of higher characteristic felds. This attack demonstrates independence between multiple vulnerability that, not only is the cubic simple matrix scheme instances (i.e., if an attacker can penetrate a susceptible to structural attacks, but that the particular vulnerability on one host, then they published parameters claiming 80 bits of security 158 can likely penetrate the same vulnerability on are less secure than claimed (albeit only slightly.) ITL CYBERSECURITY PUBLICATIONS | FY 2017Similar techniques can also be applied to improve https://doi.org/10.1109/QRS-C.2017.24 structural attacks against the original Simple Database-driven web applications are some of Matrix Encryption scheme, but they represent only the most widely developed systems today. In this a modest improvement over previous structural paper, we demonstrate the use of combinatorial attacks. This work therefore demonstrates that testing for testing database-supported web choosing a feld of characteristic 2 for the Simple applications, especially where full-text search is Matrix Encryption Scheme or its cubic variant will provided or many combinations of search options not provide any additional security value. are utilized. We develop test-case selection A. Petzoldt, M.-S. Chen, J. Ding and B.-Y. Yang. techniques, where test strings are synthesized using HMFEv - An Efcient Multivariate Signature characters or string fragments that may lead to Scheme. 8th International Workshop on Post- system failure. We have applied our approach to the Quantum Cryptography (PQCrypto 2017), Utrecht, National Vulnerability Database (NVD) application The Netherlands, June 26-28, 2017. In Lecture and have discovered a number of “corner-cases” Notes in Computer Science 10346, Post-Quantum that had not been identifed previously. We also Cryptography - PQCrypto 2017, pp. 205-223. present simple heuristics for isolating the fault- causing factors that can lead to such system failures. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-59879-6_12 The test method and input model described in this paper have immediate application to other systems Multivariate Cryptography, as one of the that provide complex full text search. main candidates for establishing post-quantum cryptosystems, provides strong, efcient and well- X. Sun, A. Singhal and P. Liu. Towards Actionable understood digital signature schemes such as Mission Impact Assessment in the Context of Cloud Unbalanced Oil-Vinegar (UOV), Rainbow, and Gui. Computing. 31st IFIP Annual Conference on Data and While Gui provides very short signatures, it is, for Applications Security and Privacy (DBSEC 2017), efciency reasons, restricted to very small fnite Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, July 19-21, 2017. In Lecture felds, which makes it hard to scale it to higher levels Notes in Computer Science 10359, DBSec 2017: Data of security and leads to large key sizes. and Applications Security and Privacy XXXI, pp. 259- 274. In this paper we propose a signature scheme called HMFEv (“Hidden Medium Field Equations”), https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-61176-1_14 which can be seen as a multivariate version of HFEv (“Hidden Field Equation”). We obtain our scheme Today’s cyber-attacks toward enterprise by applying the Vinegar Variation to the Multi-HFE networks often undermine and even fail the mission encryption scheme of Chen et al. We show both assurance of victim networks. Mission cyber theoretically and by experiments that our new resilience (or active cyber defense) is critical to scheme is secure against direct and Rank attacks. prevent or minimize the negative consequences that In contrast to other schemes of the HFE family such would impact missions. Without efective mission as Gui, HMFEv can be defned over arbitrary base impact assessment, mission cyber resilience cannot felds and therefore is much more efcient in terms be really achieved. However, there is an overlooked of both performance and memory requirements. gap between mission impact assessment and cyber Our scheme is therefore a good candidate for resilience due to the non-mission-centric nature of the upcoming standardization of post-quantum current research. This gap is even widened in the signature schemes. context of cloud computing. The gap essentially accounts for the weakest link between missions and M. Raunak, D.R. Kuhn and R.N. Kacker. attack-resilient systems, and also explains why the Combinatorial Testing of Full Text Search in Web existing impact analysis is not really actionable. Applications. Proceedings. 2017 IEEE International Conference on Software Quality, Reliability and This paper initiates eforts to bridge this Security (Companion Volume) (QRS-C 2017), Prague, gap by developing a novel graphical model that 159 Czech Republic, July 25-29, 2017, pp. 100-107. interconnects the mission dependency graphs and NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017cloud-level attack graphs. Our case study shows numerical evaluation of coverage levels of random that the new cloud-applicable model is able to testing according to various coverage criteria is bridge the gap between mission impact assessment an interesting research task and is important in and cyber resilience. As a result, it can signifcantly understanding the relationship between diferent improve the efectiveness of the cyber resilience testing approaches. analysis of mission critical systems. In this paper, we performed an experimental S. Vilkomir, A. Alluri, D.R. Kuhn and R.N. Kacker. evaluation of the coverage levels of random testing Combinatorial and MC/DC Coverage Levels of for two criteria: Modifed Condition/Decision Random Testing. 2017 IEEE International Conference Coverage (MC/DC) and combinatorial t-way on Software Quality Reliability and Security (QRS-C testing. Our experiments showed that, when the 2017), Prague, Czech Republic, July 25-29, 2017, pp. number of random test cases increased, a high level 61-68. of coverage was reached rapidly, both for MC/DC and t-way. However, many more random tests are https://doi.org/10.1109/QRS-C.2017.19 required to reach 100 % coverage. An unexpected result was that there were signifcant diferences Software testing criteria difer in their in the measurement of partial MC/DC coverage efectiveness, the numbers of test cases required, by various tools. The results may be used to select and the processes of test generation. Specifc optimal methods for practical testing and develop criteria often are compared to random testing, and new testing methods based on the integration of in some cases, random testing shows a surprisingly existing approaches. high level of efectiveness. One reason that this is the case is that any random test set has a specifc level of coverage according to any coverage criterion. The 160 ITL CYBERSECURITY PUBLICATIONS | FY 2017APPENDICES The next section contains 3 Appendices (List of Acronyms, NIST/ITL Cybersecurity Events, and Ways to Engage with ITL Cybersecurity Program and NIST). 161 NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017APPENDIX A: ACRONYMS ARM (also) Advanced Reduced Instruction Set Computing (RISC) Machine 3GPP 3rd Generation Partnership AS Autonomous System Project ASKDF Application-Specifc Key 4G 4th Generation Derivation Functions 5G 5th Generation BF Bugs Framework ABAC Attribute Based Access Control BGP Border Gateway Protocol AC Access Control BioCTS Biometric Conformance Test Software ACD Applied Cybersecurity Division BIOS Basic Input/Output System ACM Association for Computing Machinery BOF Bufer Overfow ACPT Access Control Policy Tool CASSA Cognitive-based Approach to System Security Assessment ACRLCS Access Control Rule Logic Circuit Simulation CAVP Cryptographic Algorithm Validation Program ADFSL Annual Conference on Digital Forensics, Security and Law CBC CipherBlock Chaining AEAD Authenticated Encryption with CBOR Concise Binary Object Associated Data Representation AES Advanced Encryption Standard CCE Common Confguration Enumeration AI Artifcial Intelligence CCM Counter with Cipher Block AIM Algorithms for Intrusion Chaining-Message Authentication Measurement Code AN-ITL ANSI/NIST-ITL CCSS Common Confguration Scoring System ANS American National Standard CDH Co-factor Dife-Hellman ANSI American National Standards Institute CDM Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation ANTD Advanced Network Technologies Division CFReDS Computer Forensics Reference Data Sets API Application Programming Interface CFTT Computer Forensic Tool Testing ARF Asset Reporting Format CIF Control of Interaction Frequency ARM Access Rights Management CIO Chief Information Ofcer 162 CIS Center for Internet Security APPENDIX A | FY 2017CLI Command Line Interface CTM Conformance Testing Methodology CMAC Cipher-based Message Authentication Code CUI Controlled Unclassifed Information CMUF Cryptographic Modules User Forum CVE Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures CMVP Cryptographic Module Validation Program CVP Cryptographic Validation Program CNSS Committee on National Security Systems CVSS Common Vulnerability Scoring System CNSSD CNSS Directive CVSS-SIG CVSS Special Interest Group CoP Community of Practice CWI Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica CPE Common Platform Enumeration DARPA Defense Advanced Research CPS Cyber-Physical Systems Project Agency CRADA Cooperative Research and DDoS Distributed Denial of Service Development Agreement DEA Data Encryption Algorithm CREDC Cyber Resilient Energy Delivery Consortium DH Dife-Hellman C-SCRM Cyber Supply Chain Risk DHS Department of Homeland Management Security CSD Computer Security Division DISA Defense Information Systems Agency CSE Communications Security Establishment DKIM Domain Keys Identifed Mail CSF Cybersecurity Framework DMARC Domain-based Message Authentication, Reporting and CSIA Cybersecurity and Information Conformance Assurance DNS Domain Name System CSP Credential Service Provider DNSSEC Domain Name System Security CSRC Cloud Security Rubik’s Cube Extensions CSRC (also) Computer Security DoD Department of Defense Resource Center DoE Department of Energy CSSPAB Computer System Security and Privacy Advisory Board DPC Derived PIV Credentials CST Cryptographic and Security DRBG Deterministic Random Bit Testing Generator CTG Cryptographic Technology Group DSA Digital Signature Algorithm 163 DSS Digital Signature Standard NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017DTR Derived Test Requirements FirstNet First Responder Network Authority EaaS Entropy as a Service FISMA Federal Information Security ECC Elliptic Curve Cryptography Management Act ECP Enterprise Compliance Profle FISSEA Federal Information Systems Security Educators’ Association EDR Enhanced Data Rate FOP Faulty Operation EISA Energy Independence and Security Act FPE Format-Preserving Encryption EL Engineering Laboratory FY Fiscal Year EM Encoded Message GAO Government Accountability Ofce EO Executive Order GCM Galois/Counter Mode ESDC Employment and Social Development Canada GCSE Group Communication System Enablers ETSI European Telecommunication Standardisation Institute GMAC Galois Message Authentication Code FAQ Frequently Asked Questions GSA General Services Administration FAR Federal Acquisition Regulation GUI Graphical User Interface FASTER Faster Administration of S&T Education and Research HAVA Help America Vote Act FCSM Federal Computer Security HDO Healthcare Delivery Organization Managers HFEv Hidden Field Equation FDCC Federal Desktop Core Confguration HHS Health and Human Services FDE Full Disk Encryption HIMSS Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society FEMA Federal Emergency Management Agency HIPAA Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act FFRDC Federally Funded Research and Development Center HMAC Hash-based Message Authentication Code FIDO Fast Identities Online HMFEv Hidden Medium Field Equation FIFO First In, First Out HS High Speed FIPS Federal Information Processing Standard HSPD-12 Homeland Security Presidential Directive-12 FIRST Forum of Incident Response and Security Teams HTML5 Hypertext Markup Language version 5 164 APPENDIX A | FY 2017HTTP Hyper Text Transfer Protocol IOPS Input/Output Operations Per Second HTTPS Hyper Text Transfer Protocol Secure IoT Internet of Things HWAM Hardware Asset Management IP Internet Protocol IAD Information Access Division IPSec Internet Protocol Security IARPA Intelligence Advanced Research IRS Internal Revenue Service Projects Activity ISA International Society of IC Intelligence Community Automation ICMC International Cryptographic ISACs Information Sharing and Analysis Module Conference Centers ICS Industrial Control Systems ISAOs Information Sharing and Analysis Organizations ICSP Interagency Council on Standards Policy ISCM Information Security Continuous Monitoring IdAM Identity and Access Management ISO International Organization for IEC International Electrotechnical Standardization Commission ISP Internet Service Provider IEEE Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers ISPAB Information Security and Privacy Advisory Board IETF Internet Engineering Task Force IT Information Technology IFIP International Federation for Information Processing ITL Information Technology Laboratory IG Implementation Guidance IUT Implementation Under Test IGs Inspector Generals IV Initialization Vector IICS WG Interagency International Cybersecurity Standardization IVA Intelligent Virtual Assistant Working Group IWG Interagency Working Group IIP Internet Infrastructure Protection JSON JavaScript Object Notation IKE Internet Key Exchange JTF Joint Task Force INCITS InterNational Committee JTC 1 Joint Technical Committee 1 for Information Technology Standards KBKDF Key-Based Key Derivation Functions INFORMS Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences KDF Key Derivation Functions INJ Injection KMAC KECCAK Message Authentication 165 Code I/O Input/Output NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017KMN Key Management NGAC-IRPADS Next Generation Access Control- Implementation Requirements, KSAs Knowledge, Skills, and Abilities Protocols and API Defnitions LKH Logical Key Hierarchy NIAP National Information Assurance Partnership LTE Long Term Evolution NIC Network Interface Card MAC Message Authentication Code NICE National Initiative for MAL Memory Allocation Cybersecurity Education MC/DC Modifed Condition/Decision NIST National Institute of Standards Coverage and Technology MCPTT Mission Critical Push-To-Talk NISTIR NIST Interagency Report MILE Managed Incident Lightweight NITRD Networking and Information Exchange Technology Research and MIP Modules-In-Process Development MLS Multi-Level Security NOAA National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration MMT Multi-Block Message Test NoT Network of Things MQV Menezes-Qu-Vanstone NPIVP NIST Personal Identity MRT Machine Readable Table Verifcation Program NARA National Archives and Records NPSBN National Public Safety Broadband Administration Network NCCIC National Cybersecurity and NRBG Non-deterministic Random Bit Communications Integration Generator Center NREL National Renewable Energy NCCoE National Cybersecurity Center of Laboratory Excellence NSA National Security Agency NCP National Checklist Program NSRL National Software Reference NCSA National Cyber Security Alliance Library NDAC Next-generation Database Access NTIA National Telecommunications and Control Information Administration NEA Network Endpoint Assessment NVD National Vulnerability Database NGAC Next Generation Access Control NVLAP National Voluntary Laboratory Accreditation Program NGAC-GOADS Next Generation Access Control – Generic Operations & Abstract OASIS Organization for the Data Structures Advancement of Structured Information Standards 166 APPENDIX A | FY 2017OCIL Open Checklist Interactive PRAM Privacy Risk Assessment Language Methodology OEMs Original Equipment PRFs Pseudorandom Functions Manufacturers PRNGs Pseudorandom Number OISM Ofce of Information Systems Generators Management ProSe Proximity Services OMB Ofce of Management and PSCR Public Safety Communications Budget Research OPM Ofce of Personnel Management PSS Probabilistic Signature Scheme OS Operating System PTP Precision Time Protocol OSCAL Open Security Controls R&D Research and Development Assessment Language RAM Random Access Memory OSHE Ofce of Safety, Health and Environment RBAC Role-Based Access Control OVAL Open Vulnerability and RBG Random Bit Generator Assessment Language RDBMS Relational Database Management PCI Payment Card Industry System DSS PCI Data Security Standard Payment RDS Reference Data Set Card Industry RFC Request for Comments PEP Privacy Engineering Program RIDR Robust Inter-Domain Routing PII Personally Identifable Information RISC Reduced Instruction Set Computing PIV Personal Identity Verifcation RMF Risk Management Framework PKCS Public Key Cryptography Standards RNG Random Number Generation PKI Public Key Infrastructure ROA Route Origin Authorization P.L. Public Law ROLIE Resource-Oriented Lightweight Information Exchange PM Policy Machine ROV Route Origin Validation PML Physical Measurement Laboratory RPs Relying Parties PMS Property Management Systems RPKI Resource Public Key POS Point-of-Sale Infrastructure PQC Post-Quantum Cryptography RSA Rivest, Shamir, Adleman PQCrypto Post-Quantum Cryptography SACM Security Automation and 167 Continuous Monitoring NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017SAMATE Software Assurance Metrics and SRAM Static Random Access Memory Tool Evaluation SSCA Software and Supply Chain SARD Static Analysis Reference Dataset Assurance SATE Static Analysis Tool Exposition SSD Software and Systems Division SBA Small Business Administration SSDs Solid State Drives SBIR Small Business Innovation SSH Secure Shell Research SSLF Specialized Security-Limited SC Subcommittee Functionality SCAP Security Content Automation SSO Single Sign-on Protocol SSP System Security Plan SCAPVal SCAP Content Validation Tool STIG Security Technical SCORE Special Cyber Operations Implementation Guide Research and Engineering STVMG Security Testing, Validation, and SCRM Supply Chain Risk Management Measurement Group SDO Standards Developing SWID Software Identifcation Organizations SWIMA Software Inventory Message and SEPA Smart Electric Power Alliance Attributes SGCC Smart Grid Cybersecurity SwMM-RSV Software Measures and Metrics to Committee Reduce Security Vulnerabilities SGIP Smart Grid Interoperability Panel TC Technical Committee SHA Secure Hash Algorithm TCB Trusted Computing Base SHS Secure Hash Standard TCG Trusted Computing Group SIDR Secure Inter-Domain Routing TCI Toolchain Infrastructure SIG Special Interest Group TDEA Triple Data Encryption Algorithm SLA Service Level Agreement TDES Triple Data Encryption Standard SMB Small and Medium-size Business TIG Trusted Identities Group S/MIME Secure/Multipurpose Internet TLS Transport Layer Security Mail Extensions TMSAD Trust Model for Security SMTP Simple Mail Transfer Protocol Automation Data SOFA-B Strength of Function for TNC Trusted Network Connect Authenticators – Biometrics TPM Trusted Platform Module SP Special Publications TTPs Tactics, Techniques, and SPF Sender Policy Framework Procedures 168 APPENDIX A | FY 2017UOV Unbalanced Oil-Vinegar Digital WG Working Group Signature Scheme WPANs Wireless Personal Area Networks URL Uniform Resource Locator XACML eXtensible Access Control Markup US-CERT U.S. Computer Emergency Language Readiness Team XCCDF Extensible Confguration USG U.S. Government Checklist Description Format VM Virtual Machine XML Extensible Markup Language VPN Virtual Private Network XOFs Extendable-Output Functions VRDX-SIG Vulnerability Reporting and Data XPN eXtended Packet Number eXchange SIG XTS XEX Tweakable Block Cipher with VRF Verifcation Ciphertext Stealing W3C World Wide Web Consortium 169 NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017APPENDIX B: NIST Federal%2BCollaboration%2BEnviron- ment%2BFramwork%2B20170823.pdf CYBERSECURITY EVENTS HELD DURING FY 2017 Federal Computer Security Program Managers’ Forum Meeting August 16 NIST Gaithersburg, MD. The list below describes numerous events hosted https://csrc.nist.gov/Events/2017/Federal-Comput- and/or supported by the ITL Cybersecurity Program. er-Security-Managers-Forum-Meeting Please note that the list does not include all the events at which the NIST staf presented. Workshop on Cybersecurity Workforce Development August 2 SEPTEMBER 2017 Chicago, Illinois NICE Webinar: Eforts to Align Training and https://www.nist.gov/news-events/events/2017/08/ workshop-cybersecurity-workforce-development Certifcations to the NICE Framework September 20 Webinar JULY 2017 https://www.nist.gov/news-events/events/2017/09/ nice-webinar-eforts-align-training-and- Universal CPS Environment for Federation certifcations-nice-framework Workshop July 27 NCCoE National Cybersecurity Excellence NCCoE Facility (NIST) Rockville, MD. Partnership In-Person Meeting @ Juniper Networks https://www.nist.gov/news-events/events/2017/07/ September 14 universal-cps-environment-federation-workshop Sunnyvale, California NICE Webinar: Shedding Light on Security Safeguarding Health Information: Building Clearances - Process, Requirements, and Assurance through HIPAA Security – 2017 Considerations September 5-6 July 19 Washington D.C. Webinar https://www.nist.gov/news-events/events/2017/09/ https://www.nist.gov/news-events/events/2017/07/ safeguarding-health-information-building-assurance- nice-webinar-shedding-light-security-clearances- through-hipaa-security process-requirements-and Enhancing Resiliencxwe of the Internet and AUGUST 2017 Communications Ecosystem July 11-12 Summer 2017 Software and Supply Chain NIST Gaithersburg, MD. Assurance Forum August 29-30 https://www.nist.gov/news-events/events/2017/07/ McLean, Virginia enhancing-resilience-internet-and-communications- https://csrc.nist.gov/Events/2017/Summer-2017- ecosystem Software-and-Supply-Chain-Assurance-Fo JUNE 2017 Medical Device Cybersecurity & Interoperability Workshop ISPAB Meeting August 29, 2017 June 28-30 Rockville, MD Washington D.C. https://content.govdelivery.com/attachments/ https://csrc.nist.gov/Events/2017/ISPAB-June-2017- USNIST/2017/08/25/fle_attachments/869093/ Meeting 170 APPENDICES | FY 2017NICE Webinar: Positioning the National Guard to MAY 2017 Augment the Cybersecurity Workforce SATE VI Organizing Meeting June 21 May 31 Webinar NIST Gaithersburg, MD. https://www.nist.gov/news-events/events/2017/06/ https://www.nist.gov/video/webinar-static-analysis- nice-webinar-positioning-national-guard-augment- tool-exposition-sate-vi cybersecurity-workforce https://www.nist.gov/news-events/events/2017/05/ Federal Computer Security Managers’ Forum - 2 sixth-static-analysis-tool-exposition-sate-vi day Annual Ofsite Meeting June 20-21 NCCoE Speaker Series: Continuous Diagnostics NIST Gaithersburg, MD. and Mitigation https://csrc.nist.gov/Events/2017/Federal-Computer- May 17 Security-Managers-Forum-2-day Rockville, MD Federal Information Systems Security Educators’ https://nccoe.nist.gov/events/nccoe-speaker-se- Association (FISSEA) 30th Annual Meeting ries-continuous-diagnostics-and-mitigation June 19 NIST Gaithersburg, MD. Cybersecurity Framework Workshop 2017 https://www.nist.gov/news-events/events/2017/06/ May 16-17 federal-information-systems-security-educators- NIST Gaithersburg, MD. association-fssea-30th https://www.nist.gov/news-events/events/2017/05/ cybersecurity-framework-workshop-2017 2017 PSCR Public Safety Broadband Stakeholder Meeting NCCoE Speaker Series: Improving the Customer June 12-14 Experience Without Increasing Cyber Risk - A NIST Gaithersburg, MD. Hospitality Challenge https://www.nist.gov/news-events/ May 3 events/2017/06/2017-pscr-public-safety-broadband- Rockville, MD stakeholder-meeting https://nccoe.nist.gov/events/improving-custom- er-experience-without-increasing-cyber-risk-hospi- National Cyber Summit tality-challenge June 6-8 Huntsville, Alabama APRIL 2017 https://www.nist.gov/news-events/events/2017/06/ national-cyber-summit-huntsville-alabama NICE Webinar: Rethinking Credentials for The President’s Executive Order on Cybersecurity Cybersecurity Careers Workforce: Next Steps and How to Engage April 19 June 5 Webinar Webinar https://www.nist.gov/news-events/events/2017/04/ https://www.nist.gov/news-events/events/2017/06/ nice-webinar-rethinking-credentials-cybersecuri- presidents-executive-order-cybersecurity-workforce- ty-careers next-steps-and-how NCCoE Speaker Series: Cybersecurity 101 for Small Privacy Risk Assessment: A Prerequisite for Privacy Business Risk Management April 5 June 5 Rockville, MD NIST Gaithersburg, MD. https://nccoe.nist.gov/events/nccoe-speaker-se- https://www.nist.gov/news-events/events/2017/06/ ries-cybersecurity-101-small-business 171 privacy-risk-assessment-prerequisite-privacy-risk- management NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017 APPENDIX B | FY 2017Quest Baldrige Cybersecurity Pre-Conference 30th Annual FISSEA Conference Workshop March 14-15 April 2 CANCELLED due to inclement weather Baltimore, MD. https://www.nist.gov/news-events/ https://csrc.nist.gov/Events/2017/Quest-Baldrige-Cy- events/2017/03/30th-annual-fssea-conference bersecurity-Pre-Conference-Worksh Cybersecurity Framework Virtual Events March 1 MARCH 2017 Webinar https://www.nist.gov/news-events/events/2017/03/ Women in Cybersecurity (WiCyS) Conference cybersecurity-framework-virtual-events Editor Note: 2 members of the NICE team conducted a workshop on “Building the Cybersecurity Work- force: Careers, Coaching, and Collaboration” at this FEBRUARY 2017 conference. March 30-April 1 NCCoE @ HIMSS 2017 Tucson, Arizona February 19-23 https://www.nist.gov/news-events/events/2017/03/ Exhibit Booth and several speaking engagements women-cybersecurity-wicys-conference-tucson-ari- Orlando, Florida zona https://nccoe.nist.gov/events/himss-annual-confer- ence-exhibition ISPAB Meeting March 29-31 NICE Webinar: Best Practices for Educating, Washington D.C. Training, Attracting, and Retaining Millennial https://csrc.nist.gov/Events/2017/ISP- February 15 AB-March-2017-Meeting Webinar https://www.nist.gov/news-events/events/2017/02/ Veterans in Cybersecurity Workforce Workshop nice-webinar-best-practices-educating-training-at- (NICE cooperative agreement) tracting-and-retaining March 21 Rockville, MD Federal Computer Security Program Managers’ Forum Meeting Spring 2017 Software and Supply Chain Assurance February 14 Forum NIST Gaithersburg, MD. March 15-17 https://csrc.nist.gov/Events/2017/Federal-Comput- McLean, Virginia er-Security-Managers-Forum-Meeting https://csrc.nist.gov/Events/2017/Spring-2017-Soft- ware-and-Supply-Chain-Assurance-Fo NIST Cybersecurity Program and NIST’s NCCoE Program Exhibits at the 2017 RSA Conference NICE Webinar: Building a Career Pathways System February 13-17 for Cybersecurity Exhibit Booths and demonstrations March 15 San Francisco, California Webinar https://www.nist.gov/news-events/events/2017/02/ https://www.nist.gov/news-events/events/2017/03/ nist-exhibits-2017-rsa-conference nice-webinar-building-career-pathways-system-cy- bersecurity https://nccoe.nist.gov/events/rsa-conference-2017 172 APPENDICES | FY 2017JANUARY 2017 NOVEMBER 2016 NICE Webinar: Cybersecurity Games: Building NICE Webinar: Building Your Cybersecurity Team Tomorrow’s Workforce with Apprenticeships January 18 November 16 Webinar Webinar https://www.nist.gov/news-events/events/2017/01/ https://www.nist.gov/news-events/events/2016/11/ nice-webinar-cybersecurity-games-building-tomor- nice-webinar-building-your-cybersecurity-team-ap- rows-workforce prenticeships Cybersecurity, Research, Development and Imple- NCCoE Speaker Series: Cybersecurity in the Health mentation Industry Day/Pre-Solicitation Community Conference November 9 January 13 Rockville, MD NIST Gaithersburg, MD. https://nccoe.nist.gov/events/nccoe-speaker-se- https://www.nist.gov/news-events/events/2017/01/ ries-suzanne-schwartz-fda-director-emergency-pre- cybersecurity-research-development-and-implemen- parednessoperations-and tation-industry-daypre Forensics @ NIST 2016 November 8-9 DECEMBER 2016 NIST Gaithersburg, MD. https://www.nist.gov/news-events/events/2016/11/ Winter 2016 Software and Supply Chain Assurance forensics-nist-2016 Forum December 13-15 7th Annual NICE Conference & Expo McLean, Virginia November 1-2 https://csrc.nist.gov/Events/2016/Winter-2016-Soft- Kansas City, Missouri ware-and-Supply-Chain-Assurance-Fo https://www.nist.gov/news-events/ events/2016/11/7th-annual-nice-conference-ex- NICE Webinar: Cybersecurity for Computer Science po-kansas-city-missouri December 7 Webinar https://www.nist.gov/news-events/events/2016/12/ OCTOBER 2016 nice-webinar-cybersecurity-computer-science ISPAB Meeting NCCoE Speaker Series: Understanding, Detecting & October 26-28 Mitigating Insider Threats NIST Gaithersburg, MD. December 6 https://csrc.nist.gov/Events/2016/ISPAB-Octo- Rockville, MD ber-2016-Meeting https://nccoe.nist.gov/events/nccoe-speaker-series- understanding-detecting-mitigating-insider-threats Federal Computer Security Program Managers’ Forum Meeting 3rd International Conference on Research in October 26 Security Standardisation (SSR) NIST Gaithersburg, MD. December 5-6 https://csrc.nist.gov/Events/2016/Federal-Comput- NIST Gaithersburg, MD. er-Security-Managers-Forum-Octobe https://www.nist.gov/news-events/ events/2016/12/3rd-international-conference-re- search-security-standardisation 173 NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017 APPENDIX B | FY 2017NSCI Seminar: CyberScience and National K-12 Cybersecurity Education Conference CyberInfrastructure: A New Approach to Discovery 2016 in Science and Engineering October 6-7 October 25 Arlington, Virginia NIST Gaithersburg, MD. https://www.nist.gov/news-events/events/2016/10/ https://www.nist.gov/news-events/events/2016/10/ national-k-12-cybersecurity-education-confer- nsci-seminar-cyberscience-and-cyberinfrastruc- ence-2016-arlington-virginia ture-new-approach-discovery Maryland CyberDay 2016 Safeguarding Health Information: Building October 5 Assurance through HIPAA Security – 2016 Rockville, MD October 19-20 https://www.mdcyber.com/refections-maryland-cy- Washington D.C. ber-day-2016/ https://www.nist.gov/news-events/events/2016/10/ safeguarding-health-information-building-assur- Fall 2016 Software and Supply Chain Assurance ance-through-hipaa-security Forum October 4-5 Lightweight Cryptography Workshop 2016 McLean, Virginia October 17-18 https://csrc.nist.gov/Events/2016/Fall-2016-Soft- NIST Gaithersburg, MD. ware-and-Supply-Chain-Assurance-Foru https://www.nist.gov/news-events/events/2016/10/ lightweight-cryptography-workshop-2016 NCCoE Workshop: Derived PIV Credentials October 11 NCCoE Facility (NIST) Rockville, MD. https://nccoe.nist.gov/events/nccoe-workshop-de- rived-piv-credentials https://csrc.nist.gov/Events/2016/NCCoE-Work- shop-Derived-PIV-Credentials 174 APPENDICES | FY 2017APPENDIX C: OPPORTUNITIES ANTD Contact: SSD Contact: Dr. Abdella Battou Dr. Ram Sriram TO ENGAGE WITH THE ITL 301) 975-5247 (301) 975-3507 CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM abdella.battou@nist.gov ram.sriram@nist.gov DURING FY 2018 IAD Contact: Dr. Shahram Orandi (301) 975-3261 Guest Research Internships at NIST shahram.orandi@nist.gov Opportunities are available at NIST for 6- to 24-month internships within the Computer Security Division (CSD) and the Applied Cybersecurity Division Federal Computer Security Managers’ (FCSM) (ACD). Qualifed individuals should contact CSD Forum and/or ACD, provide a statement of qualifcations, The FCSM Forum is covered in detail in the and indicate the area of work that is of interest. The Outreach section of this report. Membership is salary costs are generally borne by the sponsoring free and open to federal employees. For further institution; however, in some cases, these guest information, contact: research internships carry a small monthly stipend Team Email Address: sec-forum@nist.gov paid by NIST. For further information, see below for contacts. Ms. Victoria Pillitteri Ms. Jody Jacobs (301) 975-8542 (301) 975-4728 Details at NIST for Government or Military victoria.pillitteri@nist.gov jody.jacobs@nist.gov Personnel Visit the FCSM Forum website: Opportunities are available at NIST for 6- to https://csrc.nist.gov/groups/SMA/forum/member- 24-month details at NIST in CSD and/or ACD. Qualifed ship.html individuals should contact CSD and/or ACD, provide a statement of qualifcations, and indicate the area of Funding Opportunities at NIST work that is of interest. Generally speaking, the salary costs are borne by the sponsoring agency; however, in NIST funds industrial and academic research some cases, agency salary costs may be reimbursed by in a variety of ways. The Small Business Innovation NIST. For further information, see below for contacts. Research Program funds R&D proposals from small businesses; see https://www.nist.gov/sbir. NIST also Security Research ofers other grants to encourage work in specifc felds: precision measurement, fre research, and NIST occasionally undertakes security work, materials science. Grants/awards supporting research primarily in research, funded by other agencies. Such by industry, academia, and other institutions are sponsored work is accepted by NIST when it can available on a competitive basis through several cost-efectively further the goals of NIST and the diferent Institute ofces. sponsoring institution. For further information, see below for contacts: For general information on NIST grants programs, please contact: CONTACTS: Mr. Christopher Hunton CSD Contact: ACD Contact: (301) 975-5718 Mr. Matthew Scholl Mr. Kevin Stine grants@nist.gov (301) 975-2941 (301) 975-4483 175 matthew.scholl@nist.gov kevin.stine@nist.gov Funding opportunity information: https://www.nist. gov/about-nist/funding-opportunities NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT 2017 APPENDIX C | FY 2017176 APPENDICES | FY 2017